Our studies focus on a residual soil of the metropolitan area of Rio de Janeiro. Almost no data are available on biodegradation of blended gasoline in tropical soils although leaks frequently occur in these soils. Residual soils are ubiquitous in Brazil and present specific geotechnical, geological and microbiological characteristics, very different from the sedimentary soils usually found in the northern hemisphere, characteristics which may be of great importance when biodegrading activities are concerned. Monitoring of microbial numbers may be an effective tool to evaluate biodegradation processes; however, as most environmental microorganisms are not able to grow under laboratory conditions (unculturable strains), monitoring microbial biomass does not inform on the effectiveness of biodegrading activities as population shifts may happen independently of microbial activity. Thus, monitoring microbial degrading activity is an important complement to biological studies on biodegradation of xenobiotic compounds (Badiane et al., 2001; Holliger et al., 1997; Riis et al., 1998 ;  Taylor et al., 2002). Microbial parameters also allow us to evaluate whether microbial communities are being impacted by contamination and adapting so as to eventually start biodegradation processes (e.g. Brohon et al., 2001; Chaîneau et al., 2003; Daubaras and Chakraborty, 1992; Margesin et al., 2000 ;  van Straalen, 2002). This article presents results from several experimental studies that evaluated the aerobic biodegradation and fate of ethanol-blended gasoline in unsaturated tropical soils. A multi-disciplinary approach was used to evaluate several physical, chemical and biological parameters. Experiments with inert quartz porous medium were conducted and compared to natural soil assays in order to assess the importance of soil on all processes. 2. Materials and methods 2.1. Biodegradation studies The objective of this study was to assess the effect of ethanol on the distribution, retention and biodegradation of gasoline compounds in unsaturated tropical soil. Laboratory studies were conducted with natural undisturbed soil in microcosms. Although data obtained with this kind of approach are not applicable to the field, results from microcosm studies are indicative of processes that may happen in the field as well as valuable tools to compare different conditions (Knacker et al., 2004 ;  van Straalen, 2002). 2.1.1. Soil The soil used for this study is found in the metropolitan area of Rio de Janeiro, south-eastern Brazil. It is a natural unsaturated soil taken at a depth between 3 and 5 m from a weathering profile of kinzigitic gneissic rocks, comprising a young or saprolitic gneissic residual soil belonging to the pedological horizon C. At this depth, structural macroscopic features from the mother rock are preserved: samples taken for soil characterisation show randomly distributed grey and white facies, the former prevailing at the sampling depth. The grey facies of the soil that predominates in the weathering profile is sandy silt material with quartz and mica biotite as dominant minerals and kaolinite as the main clay fraction. The white facies is silty sand, with quartz and potassic feldspar as main minerals and gibbsite as clay fraction. Both facies present rather low clay content. In this well-drained soil, air and water circulation are not likely to be easily interrupted by biomass increases or excess water input. Thus, it is probable that microbial aerobic processes prevail. The microbiological evaluation showed significant fluctuations in parameter measurements from different times of the year. The soil presents low total heterotrophic bacterial populations, low degrading activity as well as the presence of culturable gasoline degraders in the indigenous microbiota. Similar biomasses were found in both facies but soil microorganisms appear more efficient in carbon assimilation in the sandy facies (Österreicher-Cunha et al., 2007). Further geotechnical, mineralogical and microbiological details have been described elsewhere (Österreicher-Cunha et al., 2004). Structured soil cubic blocks (30 cm3, cubical/cubic) and cylinders (20 cm  15 cm high) were collected in a slope at approximately 3 m depth and used for laboratory assays, as described by Österreicher-Cunha et al., 2004 ;  Österreicher-Cunha et al., 2007. 2.1.2. 