Molecular characterization of bacterial communities mineralizing benzene under sulfate-reducing conditions The microbial communities of in situ reactor columns degrading benzene with sulfate as an electron acceptor were analyzed based on clone libraries and terminal restriction fragment length polymorphism fingerprinting of PCR-amplified 16S rRNA genes. The columns were filled with either lava granules or sand particles and percolated with groundwater from a benzene-contaminated aquifer. The predominant organisms colonizing the lava granules were related to Magnetobacterium sp., followed by a phylotype affiliated to the genera Cryptanaerobacter/Pelotomaculum and several Deltaproteobacteria. From the sand-filled columns, a stable benzene-degrading consortium was established in sand-filled laboratory microcosms under sulfate-reducing conditions. It was composed of Delta- and Epsilonproteobacteria, Clostridia, Chloroflexi, Actinobacteria and Bacteroidetes. The most prominent phylotype of the consortium was related to the genus Sulfurovum, followed by Desulfovibrio sp. and the Cryptanaerobacter/Pelotomaculum phylotype. The proportion of the latter was similar in both communities and significantly increased after repeated benzene-spiking. During cultivation on aromatic substrates other than benzene, the Cryptanaerobacter/Pelotomaculum phylotype was outcompeted by other community members. Hence, this organism appears to be specific for benzene as a growth substrate and might play a key role in benzene degradation in both communities. Based on the possible functions of the community members and thermodynamic calculations, a functional model for syntrophic benzene degradation under sulfate-reducing conditions is proposed. Introduction Aromatic hydrocarbons such as benzene, toluene, ethylbenzene and xylenes (BTEX) make up a significant percentage of gasoline. They are toxic and, due to their relatively high water solubility and volatility, mobile in the saturated and vadose zone of an aquifer. Benzene is the most mobile and most toxic BTEX compound (Aksoy, 1985). All BTEX compounds are easily biodegraded under oxic conditions by ubiquitous bacteria (van Agteren et al., 1998). However, due to the low water solubility and rapid microbial consumption of oxygen, contaminant plumes become generally anoxic. Anaerobic benzene degradation was observed in laboratory enrichment cultures under methanogenic (Vogel & Grbic-Galic, 1987; Kazumi et al., 1997), nitrate-reducing (Nales et al., 1998; Burland & Edwards, 1999), iron-reducing (Lovley et al., 1996; Kazumi et al., 1997; Nales et al., 1998; Jahn et al., 2005; Botton & Parsons, 2006; Kunapuli et al., 2007) and sulfate-reducing conditions (Edwards & Grbic-Galic, 1992; Lovley et al., 1995; Phelps et al., 1996; Kazumi et al., 1997; Nales et al., 1998; Phelps & Young, 1999; Vogt et al., 2007; Musat & Widdel, 2008). Nevertheless, benzene is considered the most recalcitrant of all BTEX compounds, as the majority of laboratory and field studies failed to demonstrate anaerobic benzene degradation (Aronson & Howard, 1997; Johnson et al., 2003). Results from microcosm studies suggest that anaerobic benzene degraders are not ubiquitous in subsurface sediments (Kazumi et al., 1997; Nales et al., 1998; Weiner & Lovley, 1998; Phelps & Young, 1999). Recently, pure cultures of benzene-metabolizing, facultatively anaerobic nitrate reducers were isolated (Kasai et al., 2006). However, most sulfate-reducing or methanogenic benzene-degrading enrichment cultures were still phylogenetically diverse after cultivation for many years (Phelps et al., 1998; Ulrich & Edwards, 2003). This suggests that under strictly anoxic conditions, benzene is degraded by consortia rather than by single organisms. The biochemical pathway of anaerobic benzene degradation is currently not elucidated (Caldwell & Suflita, 2000; Ulrich et al., 2005). We studied benzene degradation in an anoxic BTEX-contaminated aquifer polluted by a former hydrogenation and benzene production plant, where sulfate is the main electron acceptor. Previously, in situ benzene degradation was demonstrated and quantified at the site by compound-specific stable isotope fractionation analysis (Vieth et al., 2005; Fischer et al., 2007). Additionally, stable benzene-degrading enrichment cultures were established under sulfate-reducing conditions using material from in situ microcosms (Herrmann et al., 2008) or benzene-degrading columns as inoculum (Vogt et al., 2007). These columns were percolated with sulfidic groundwater from the site containing benzene as the main source of carbon and energy. The fill material of the columns consisted of sand particles or lava granules, two materials with distinctly different physico-chemical properties. In both sand- and lava-filled columns, benzene was mineralized with sulfate as an electron acceptor, as demonstrated by calculation of mass balances for benzene, sulfate and bicarbonate. 