In untreated dry soil (treatment 1M), the size of the heterotrophic population remained constant until day 135 and the size of the PAH-degrading population remained constant until day 90. Between days 135 and 200 the sizes of the two populations decreased by approximately 1 order of magnitude. Aeration and the optimal humidity (treatment 2M) resulted in a remarkable shift in the proportion of the PAH-degrading population (Fig. 1). No differences in microbial population counts were observed when the results for addition of biosurfactant (treatment 5M), addition of ferric octoate (treatment 7M), or bioaugmentation (treatment 6M) were compared with the results for treatment 4M. Analysis of treatments by denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis.The biodegradation results and microbial counts revealed three different treatment groups: (i) untreated soil, (ii) treated soil without nutrient addition, and (iii) treated soil with nutrient addition. Thus, the effects of different biostimulation conditions on the structure and dynamics of the bacterial community were analyzed by DGGE by using samples from treatments 1M (untreated soil), 2M (aerated soil at 40% water-holding capacity without nutrient addition), and 4M (like treatment 2M but with nutrient addition) taken during the 200-day experiment. In addition, the effect of bioaugmentation (treatment 6M) was monitored by DGGE, and this treatment was compared with treatments 4M and 1M. The bacterial community in untreated soil (treatment 1M) was complex (27 or 28 DGGE bands) and did not change over the course of the 200-day experiment (Fig. 2). However, biostimulation treatments with (treatment 4M) and without (treatment 2M) nutrient addition resulted in shifts in the composition of the microbial community. In particular, the initial profiles (21 and 45 days) were clearly different; the 2M and 4M treatments produced 22 to 24 and 19 to 22 DGGE bands, respectively (Fig. 2). The microbial diversity decreased during the maximum biodegradation period for all treatments, from 1.28 on day 0 to 1.18 after 90 days, and remained low until the end of the incubation. Other authors have described both increases and reductions in diversity during biodegradation. Our results are similar to those reported by Andreoni et al. (6) obtained with a PAH-contaminated soil, whereas Kaplan and Kitts (18) and Zucchi et al. (41) reported increases in diversity during bioremediation of crude oil-contaminated soil. Principal-component analysis of the bacterial community.Temporal changes in the bacterial community were monitored using principal-component analysis (Fig. 3). Based on visual inspection of the raw data, there was a clear difference in the DGGE profiles between microcosms that depended on the time and type of biostimulation treatment. PCA revealed three different groups; the first group consisted of untreated soil (at 0 and 200 days), and the second and third groups consisted of biostimulated soil with and without nutrient addition, respectively. Both biostimulation treatments (treatments 2M and 4M) exhibited a noticeable and regular separation from untreated soil (treatment 1M) in the first principal component (PC1), which explained 35.9% of the variation in the data during the 200 days of incubation (Fig. 3). Furthermore, for each treatment the PC1 value was increasingly far from the initial point as incubation time increased. The highest second principal component (PC2) for the 2M treatment corresponded to positive values, while for the 4M treatment the values were negative (Table 4). This could explain the distance in PC2 observed between the biostimulation treatments. Analysis of variance of the PC2 scores, which represented 24.0% of the variation in the data, showed that there was a significant difference between biostimulation groups (P < 0.05) over the course of the experiment. Coincidentally, the greatest change in PC2 occurred during the first 45 days of incubation, during which the TPH biodegradation rates were more significant (Table 2). 