No CFB bacteria were found. Phylogenetic groups during bioremediation.At the beginning of the experiment, α-Proteobacteria (78%), dominated by Sphingomonadaceae, were predominant in contaminated soil, followed by γ-Proteobacteria (16%), dominated by Xanthomonadaceae, whereas the other groups were scarce. During biodegradation, the microbial population shifted dramatically, and after 200 days of incubation of the 2M treatment, γ-Proteobacteria were dominant (50%), followed by α-Proteobacteria (25%) and the CFB group (22%), while for the 4M treatment, α-Proteobacteria and γ-Proteobacteria were the dominant groups (36% each), followed by β-Proteobacteria and high-G+C-content gram-positive bacteria (19% and 8%, respectively) (Fig. 4). A correlation analysis of the phylogenetic groups and evolution of the TPH concentration showed that the α- and γ-Proteobacteria exhibited the highest positive and inverse correlations with the TPH concentration, respectively (r2 = 0.92 to 0.93) for the 2M treatment; for the 4M treatment the α-Proteobacteria exhibited the highest positive correlation (r2 = 0.78), whereas the β-Proteobacteria exhibited the highest inverse correlation (r2 = 0.85), followed by the γ-Proteobacteria (r2 = 0.78). For target PAH concentrations in the 2M treatment, the CFB group exhibited the highest inverse correlation (r2 = 0.81 to 0.85) with the pyrene, benzo(a)anthracene, and chrysene concentrations, whereas α-Proteobacteria and γ-Proteobacteria exhibited the highest positive and inverse correlations with fluoranthene (r2 = 0.92 to 0.94), phenanthrene (r2 = 0.76), and anthracene (r2 = 0.84). β-Proteobacteria did not exhibit good correlations with target PAHs (r2 = 0 to 0.4). In contrast, for nutrient treatment 4M, α-Proteobacteria and β-Proteobacteria exhibited the highest positive and inverse correlations, respectively, with fluoranthene and pyrene (r2 = 0.83 to 0.89). Also, β-Proteobacteria exhibited a good inverse correlation with phenanthrene, anthracene, benzo(a)anthracene, and chrysene (r2 = 0.84 to 0.92). γ-Proteobacteria exhibited lower correlations with PAH concentrations (r2 = 0.5 to 0.7) for the 4M treatment. Monitoring bioaugmentation by denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis.At the beginning of the experiment, the profiles for biostimulation and bioaugmentation were very similar, forming two clusters (21 and 45 days) in each of the two treatments (Fig. 5). Only one of the DGGE bands from the inoculum was shared in inoculated soil during the 200 days of the experiment. Taking into account the fact that inoculation was performed five times (days 14, 26, 57, 120, and 165) in order to have 108 microorganisms g (dry weight) of soil−1 at each time of addition, this result implies that the inoculum did not compete favorably with the indigenous bacterial community during the first stages of PAH biodegradation. However, at 200 days the DGGE profiles for biostimulation and bioaugmentation were quite different. Hence, it seems that at early stages, when the biodegradation process was dominant, an exogenous inoculum did not affect the distribution of the indigenous microbial population, while at late stages, when the biodegradation of PAHs and TPH was very slow, it could have an effect (Table 2). DISCUSSION A creosote-contaminated soil from a wood treatment facility that had been operating for at least 30 years was the subject of the present study. A high proportion of PAH-degrading bacteria at the beginning of the experiment (Fig. 1) and the absence of a lag phase at the beginning of TPH degradation (data not shown) revealed the presence of a preadapted PAH-degrading microbial population in the original soil. Effects of different treatments on the degradation of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons.The kinetics of TPH degradation displayed a biphasic pattern for all bioremediation treatments. This behavior may have been due to a number of factors, such as a decrease in PAH bioavailability (3), accumulation of toxic PAH metabolites (11), or enrichment of more recalcitrant compounds (30). In a parallel study, a decrease in bioavailability was demonstrated (31). The accumulation of metabolites resulting from oxidation of PAHs can reduce the viability of several PAH degraders in addition to inhibiting the degradation of PAH (11, 20, 21). Nevertheless, this probably was not the case in this study, because polar metabolites determined by gas chromatography-mass spectrometry of the derivatized polar fraction did not accumulate in the soil (31). In addition, leachates from the soil after the different treatments showed that there was a reduction in soil toxicity, as determined by Microtox (31). Taking into account the finding that in the original dry soil (water content, 1.6%) the TPH concentration was not reduced during the experiment, water content and aeration became the key factors for soil bioremediation. The quantities of nutrients added in our treatments, taking into account only the inorganic nitrogen forms, were established in order to obtain a molar C/N/P ratio of 300:10:1. The required quantities were added at three times during the experiment in order to avoid inhibition caused by a drastic osmotic change, as has been described elsewhere (38). Recently, Atagana (7) described the ratio used in this study as optimal for a creosote-contaminated soil. 