The microbial diversity decreased during the maximum biodegradation period for all treatments, from 1.28 on day 0 to 1.18 after 90 days, and remained low until the end of the incubation. Other authors have described both increases and reductions in diversity during biodegradation. Our results are similar to those reported by Andreoni et al. (6) obtained with a PAH-contaminated soil, whereas Kaplan and Kitts (18) and Zucchi et al. (41) reported increases in diversity during bioremediation of crude oil-contaminated soil. Principal-component analysis of the bacterial community.Temporal changes in the bacterial community were monitored using principal-component analysis (Fig. 3). Based on visual inspection of the raw data, there was a clear difference in the DGGE profiles between microcosms that depended on the time and type of biostimulation treatment. PCA revealed three different groups; the first group consisted of untreated soil (at 0 and 200 days), and the second and third groups consisted of biostimulated soil with and without nutrient addition, respectively. Both biostimulation treatments (treatments 2M and 4M) exhibited a noticeable and regular separation from untreated soil (treatment 1M) in the first principal component (PC1), which explained 35.9% of the variation in the data during the 200 days of incubation (Fig. 3). Furthermore, for each treatment the PC1 value was increasingly far from the initial point as incubation time increased. The highest second principal component (PC2) for the 2M treatment corresponded to positive values, while for the 4M treatment the values were negative (Table 4). This could explain the distance in PC2 observed between the biostimulation treatments. Analysis of variance of the PC2 scores, which represented 24.0% of the variation in the data, showed that there was a significant difference between biostimulation groups (P < 0.05) over the course of the experiment. Coincidentally, the greatest change in PC2 occurred during the first 45 days of incubation, during which the TPH biodegradation rates were more significant (Table 2). FIG. 3. View larger version: In this page In a new window Download as PowerPoint Slide FIG. 3. Principal-component analysis scatter plot of denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis profiles (Fig. 2) over the course of the incubation period. 1M, 2M, and 4M indicate untreated soil (dry soil), aerated soil at 40% WHC without nutrient addition, and aerated soil at 40% WHC with nutrient addition, respectively. The numbers of days after treatment are also indicated; for example, 4M 135d indicates biostimulated soil with nutrient addition on day 135. View this table: In this window In a new window TABLE 4. Properties of bands from DGGE: designations and accession numbers for the band sequences and levels of similarity to related organisms It is interesting that only two bands were shared by different treatments. Bands B2-11 and B2-20 were identical to bands B4-12 and B4-24, respectively. Furthermore, these DGGE bands displayed similar dynamics for the two treatments and exhibited the most negative PC1 loading values (0.909 and 0.961, respectively). Their dynamics could explain the migration along PC1 observed for both treatments. 