1, the sizes of both the heterotrophic and PAH-degrading microbial populations increased 2 to 3 orders of magnitude between day 0 and day 21 for treatments in which there was nutrient addition (treatments 4M to 7M), whereas the population subjected to the biostimulation treatment without nutrient addition (treatment 2M) increased more slowly (1 to 2 orders of magnitude at 21 to 45 days). After 90 days of incubation, the sizes of both populations returned to the initial values for treatments in which there was nutrient addition (treatments 4M to 7M), whereas for treatment 2M the PAH-degrading population remained 1 order of magnitude larger than the population at the initial stage. In untreated dry soil (treatment 1M), the size of the heterotrophic population remained constant until day 135 and the size of the PAH-degrading population remained constant until day 90. Between days 135 and 200 the sizes of the two populations decreased by approximately 1 order of magnitude. FIG. 1. View larger version: In this page In a new window Download as PowerPoint Slide FIG. 1. Heterotrophic (A) and PAH-degrading (B) populations in soil treatments over the course of 200 days of incubation. Autoclaved soil (treatment 3M) presented a microbial population only after 135 days of incubation (10 to 100 MPN g [dry weight] of soil−1) (data not shown). The values in boldface type are percentages for the PAH-degrading population for the basic treatment (treatment 2M), whereas the other values are values for the PAH-degrading populations for the nutrient treatments and untreated soil. Aeration and the optimal humidity (treatment 2M) resulted in a remarkable shift in the proportion of the PAH-degrading population (Fig. 1). No differences in microbial population counts were observed when the results for addition of biosurfactant (treatment 5M), addition of ferric octoate (treatment 7M), or bioaugmentation (treatment 6M) were compared with the results for treatment 4M. Analysis of treatments by denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis.The biodegradation results and microbial counts revealed three different treatment groups: (i) untreated soil, (ii) treated soil without nutrient addition, and (iii) treated soil with nutrient addition. Thus, the effects of different biostimulation conditions on the structure and dynamics of the bacterial community were analyzed by DGGE by using samples from treatments 1M (untreated soil), 2M (aerated soil at 40% water-holding capacity without nutrient addition), and 4M (like treatment 2M but with nutrient addition) taken during the 200-day experiment. In addition, the effect of bioaugmentation (treatment 6M) was monitored by DGGE, and this treatment was compared with treatments 4M and 1M. The bacterial community in untreated soil (treatment 1M) was complex (27 or 28 DGGE bands) and did not change over the course of the 200-day experiment (Fig. 2). However, biostimulation treatments with (treatment 4M) and without (treatment 2M) nutrient addition resulted in shifts in the composition of the microbial community. In particular, the initial profiles (21 and 45 days) were clearly different; the 2M and 4M treatments produced 22 to 24 and 19 to 22 DGGE bands, respectively (Fig. 2). FIG. 2. View larger version: In this page In a new window Download as PowerPoint Slide FIG. 2. Denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis (35 to 70% denaturant) of PCR-amplified 16S rRNA gene fragments from treatments 4M (with nutrient addition), 1M (untreated dry soil), and 2M (without nutrient addition) over the course of a of 200-day incubation. Lane M contained a DNA soil sample (treatment 1M) obtained at 200 days that was used as a marker. The asterisks indicate comigration with bands from untreated soil. 