Where abundant at the sea floor, thermogenic gas hydrates impact bacterially-mediated processes in chemosynthetic communities dependent on methane and H2S. Our main gas hydrate sites are at ∼540 m water depth and relatively low temperature (∼7°C). Gas hydrates outcrop as vein-fillings in hemipelagic muds near gas vents within chemosynthetic communities. Molecular and isotopic properties of hydrate-forming C1–C5 hydrocarbons and CO2 provide insight to bacterially-mediated processes. Hydrate-bound methane is altered by bacterial oxidation, as indicated by enrichment of 13C and deuterium (D), and by CO2 depleted in 13C. The degree of gas hydrate alteration appears related to duration of exposure at the sea floor. In hydrate-associated sediments, bacterial oxidation of a mixed pool of hydrocarbons yields a net production of CO2 depleted in 13C. Bacterial oxidation of hydrate-bound methane and free hydrocarbon gases in adjacent sediments could contribute to gas hydrate decomposition. Some thermogenic carbon in sediments could be recycled via methanogenesis to yield a net production of bacterial methane depleted in 13C. Our results strengthen the hypothesis that gas hydrates could favor life in other extreme environments at low temperatures. Complex chemosynthetic communities on the Gulf of Mexico continental slope were first discovered during trawling in areas characterized by sediments containing free hydrocarbon gases, gas hydrates, bacterially oxidized oil rich in toxic aromatic hydrocarbons, and authigenic carbonate rock at water depths in the 600–700 m range (Kennicutt et al., 1985). These low-temperature complex chemosynthetic communities (tube worms, methanotrophic mussels, clams, and various other fauna) derive energy from reduced carbon, mainly methane, and bacterial H2S. Later research confirmed that a number of complex chemosynthetic communities were spatially associated with gas hydrate on the Gulf slope (Sassen et al., 1993; MacDonald et al., 1994; Sassen et al., 1994; Sassen and MacDonald, 1994; Sassen and MacDonald, 1997; Fisher et al., 1998 ; Sassen et al., 1998). Because of the enormous global abundance of methane gas hydrates (Kvenvolden, 1993), evidence of a link between gas hydrates and chemosynthetic communities is significant. Deep-sea gas hydrates are ice-like crystalline substances (minerals) in which hydrocarbon and non-hydrocarbon gases of specific molecular diameters are held by hydrogen bonding within rigid cages of water molecules. Structure I hydrate (body centered cubic lattice) generally contains methane and other non-hydrocarbon gases formed by bacterial activity at shallow depths in sediment (Sloan, 1990; Kvenvolden, 1993 ; Kvenvolden, 1995). In contrast, other gas hydrates contain thermogenic gases that have migrated to shallow sediments from deep hot subsurface hydrocarbon systems. Structure II gas hydrate (diamond lattice) encages C1–C4 hydrocarbons, and structure H hydrate (hexagonal lattice) encages C1–C5 hydrocarbons to include i-C5 (Sloan, 1990). Thermogenic hydrates also contain CO2 and other non-hydrocarbon gases formed in the deep subsurface (Brooks et al., 1986). Gas hydrates with all three crystal structures occur on the Gulf of Mexico continental slope ( Kvenvolden, 1995; Booth et al., 1996; Sassen and MacDonald, 1994 ; Sassen and MacDonald, 1997). Thermogenic gas hydrates outcrop on the Gulf of Mexico slope sea floor (MacDonald et al., 1994). In contrast to gas hydrate buried at tens or hundreds of meters in sediments (Kvenvolden, 1995), outcropping gas hydrates of the Gulf slope exist in a relatively unstable environment. Shallow gas hydrates are subject to rapid temperature changes from periodic invasions of warm loop current water on the Gulf slope (MacDonald et al., 1994). Rates of gas venting on the Gulf slope fluctuate episodically over both long and short time scales because of changes in sea level, and because of dynamic geologic responses to rapid sediment loading (Roberts and Carney, 1997). Fluctuations in equilibrium conditions could affect gas hydrates and chemosynthetic communities (Carney, 1994). Recent research suggested that bacterial alteration of solid gas hydrate occurs via the oxidation of methane (Sassen et al., 1998). Here, we investigate the molecular and isotopic properties of C1–C5 gases and CO2 in the larger gas hydrate environment to provide insight to bacterially-mediated geochemical processes that impact complex chemosynthetic communities. Findings of this study expand the hypothesis that abundant sea-floor thermogenic gas hydrates could affect the stability of ecosystems in extreme environments at low-temperatures (Carney, 1994; Sassen et al., 1994 ; Sassen et al., 1998). 2. 