Hydrocarbon geochemistry (Brooks et al., 1986 ; Sassen et al., 1994), and chemosynthetic fauna (MacDonald et al., 1990a), are generally similar to those of Bush Hill. Fisher et al. (1998) observed unidentified polychaete worms (“ice worms”) that clustered directly on outcropping gas hydrate at the GC 234 study site. The brine pool study site (GC 233: 27°43.4′ N and 91°16.8′ W) is an anoxic brine pool at a water depth of about 640 m (Fig. 1). The brine pool arises from fluid flow along a salt-related fault (Reilly et al., 1996). The brine pool is rimmed by methanotrophic mussels, whereas tube worms and other chemosynthetic fauna are present in low abundance. Dissolved methane of bacterial origin saturates the brine itself, and free gas vents from the brine pool to the water column. The hydrocarbon geochemistry of the brine pool is dissimilar to that of the Bush Hill and GC 234 sites in that bacterial methane dominates (MacDonald et al., 1990b). Gas hydrate has not been documented at this site. 3. Samples and methods During the 1995 and 1997 dives of the Johnson Sea-Link (JSL) research submersible, the main hydrocarbon pools related to gas venting and abundant gas hydrates within chemosynthetic communities (vent gases, gas hydrates, sediment gases) were sampled. The sampling strategy at Bush Hill and GC 234 was intended to encompass zones of maximum potential impact from abundant gas hydrates. Therefore, the gas-hydrate rich zones of our study may not be representative of the entire expanse of the chemosynthetic communities we studied, nor of other low-temperature communities elsewhere. Each gas hydrate site includes multiple exposures of gas hydrate, and for this reason, specific localities are defined for future reference. At the Bush Hill site, samples of vent gases, gas hydrates, and associated sediments were collected at stations identified as BHHYD-1 (Fig. 2 ; Fig. 3) and BHHYD-2; the GC 234 site samples were collected at a single station identified as GCHYD-1 (Fig. 4). Samples of tube worm sediments were acquired in the vicinity of gas hydrate localities at stations defined as BHST-2 (see Fig. 2) and GCAT-2. For purposes of comparison with a setting lacking gas hydrate, samples of venting gas were collected at the GC 233 brine pool at a station identified as BPRN-1 (Fig. 5). We sampled free gas naturally venting into the water column at Bush Hill and GC 234, within ∼0.5 m of underlying massive gas hydrates at mounds. This intimate association suggests that the vent gas is representative of the hydrocarbon pool from which the gas hydrate crystallized. The mechanical arm of the submersible was used to hold gas-tight Lexan tubes (30 cm in length and 7.5 cm inside diameter) over gas bubble trains until the ambient sea water in the tube was displaced. Gas venting from the GC 233 brine pool was collected the same way. Intact vent gas samples were recovered at the sea surface, transferred to vacutainers, and frozen at −20°C (Sassen and MacDonald, 1997). Samples of solid gas hydrate were acquired at mound flanks at Bush Hill and GC 234 where they outcrop, or where best situated beneath a thin veneer of underconsolidated hemipelagic sediment. 