The PCR product was loaded on 1-mm-thick 8% (wt/vol) polyacrylamide (ratio of acrylamide to bisacrylamide, 37.5:1) gels containing a linear 30 to 55% denaturant gradient; 100% denaturant was 7 M urea and 40% (vol/vol) formamide. The gels were electrophoresed in 1× TAE buffer (40 mM Tris-acetate, 1 mM Na-EDTA; pH 8.0) at 60°C and 200 V for 4 h. The gels were stained in 1× TAE buffer containing SYBR Green I (Sigma, St. Louis, Mo.) and were examined with UV transillumination by using a Fluor-S multiimager (Bio-Rad, Hercules, Calif.). Images were analyzed by using the Quantity One 4.1 software (Bio-Rad), and data were exported to Excel and used for numerical analysis with Systat 7.0 (SPSS Inc.). Similarities between tracks were calculated by using the band-based Dice coefficient (SD) (SD = 2nAB/[nA + nB], where nAB is the number of bands present in both track A and track B and nA and nB are the numbers of bands in tracks A and B, respectively) and band-independent, whole-densitometric-curve-based Pearson product-moment correlation coefficients (r) (22). Statistically significant differences between sets of samples were determined as follows. First, the 95% limits of confidence for similarity values were determined from a set of similarity values for 13 replicate samples (replicate DNA extraction, PCR, and DGGE procedures for the same sample; the samples were obtained from a control plot that was not treated with oil and fertilizer in order to allow statistical discrimination of the bacterial community profiles from the treated plots relative to the untreated control). These similarity values were arcsine transformed to obtain normal distribution of the data (11). Next, the mean and standard deviation were calculated. To calculate the 95% lower limit of confidence (α = 0.05) (4), the critical value at α = 0.05 was multiplied by the standard deviation and subtracted from the mean; then this value was back-transformed to give the lower 95% confidence limit. As three samples per plot were analyzed, the within-plot variation was determined from three similarity values, and the between-plot variation was determined from nine similarity comparisons. Based on binomial distributions (4), with data from three similarity measurements no values below the confidence limit are acceptable, while for comparison of nine similarity values at most one value below the 95% lower limit of confidence is acceptable in order to conclude with 95% certainty that no significant differences in community structure are present between plots. Cloning, sequencing, and phylogenetic analysis of 16S rRNA gene fragments.Almost full-length 16S rRNA gene fragments were amplified by using primers pA and pH′ (8). Except for the primers, the PCR conditions were the same as those described above. PCR products were cloned with an AdvanTAge kit (Clontech, Palo Alto, Calif.), and the 16S rRNA gene libraries were screened by amplified ribosomal DNA restriction analysis (ARDRA). E. coli clones were categorized into different ARDRA types based on the patterns obtained after simultaneous digestion with restriction enzymes RsaI and HaeIII. Representatives of ARDRA types that occurred more than once in a library were subjected to DGGE, and clones corresponding to dominant bands in the DGGE fingerprint of the same sample from which the clone library was constructed were completely sequenced (8). Sequence data were obtained from DGGE bands by excising the bands from the DGGE gels and reamplifying them with primers 2 and 3 (18), followed by another round of DGGE analysis and excision of the appropriate bands. 16S rRNA gene fragments from the DGGE analysis were sequenced by using primers pC and pD′ (8). If unambiguous sequences could not be obtained, the excised bands were cloned, and transformants were screened by using DGGE. Three clones with mobility in DGGE gels similar to that of the excised band were sequenced. Sequences were compared to sequences deposited in the GenBank DNA database by using the BLAST algorithm (1). Nearly full-length 16S rRNA sequences were aligned manually with representative 16S rRNA sequences from the Ribosomal Database Project. Only unambiguously aligned base positions were used in the analysis. Distance analysis with the Jukes-Cantor correction (13) and bootstrap resampling (100 times) were done with the TREECON package (32), and the distance matrix was used to construct a tree by neighbor joining (24). Parsimony analysis was done with DNAPARS from the PHYLIP package (9). Data analysis and manipulation were performed by using the Genetic Data Environment software running on a SPARC 10 workstation (Sun Microsystems). Nucleotide sequence accession numbers.Nucleotide sequences have been deposited in the GenBank database under accession numbers AF548761 to AF548767. Previous Section Next Section RESULTS Inorganic nutrient levels in experimental treatments.Measurements of nitrogen and phosphorus concentrations in interstitial water sampled daily between days 5 and 9 and on day 80 after fertilization showed that the slow-release fertilizer treatment led to nitrogen and phosphorus concentrations that were significantly higher (21.2 ± 30.8 mg of N/liter and 18.7 ± 27.9 mg P/liter; P < 0.001) than the concentrations in the plots with no fertilizer treatment or in the plots treated with liquid fertilizer (0.8 ± 0.7 mg of N/liter and 0.9 ± 0.8 mg of P/liter). 