2 and 3), indicating that despite recent expansion, our knowledge of the extent of microbial diversity is still incomplete, even at the division level. Candidate divisions WS1 to WS6 are each represented by only one to three Wurtsmith sequence types but together comprise 10% of the total number of sequence types analyzed. Study of additional representatives of these groups will be required to verify their division level status. Microbial distribution.Four SSU rDNA libraries were created with universal PCR primers. Two universal libraries were created from a single extraction of DNA from the methanogenic zone (WCHA and WsCH), one originated from the interface between the methanogenic zone and sulfate-reducing zone (WSA), and one originated from the iron- or sulfate-reducing zone (WFeA) (Fig. 1). Libraries WCHA and WsCH were created to test the reproducibility of the PCR and cloning steps of the library construction protocol. The libraries had the same set of numerically dominant sequence types; sequence types that occurred infrequently differed between the libraries (Table 1). The composition of the WSA library was very similar to those of the WCHA and WsCH libraries, indicating that the two soil samples were possibly from geochemically similar environments. These results indicate that the classification of the two samples as originating from different redox zones may need reassessment. The WFeA library had a suite of sequence types different from those of the other libraries, consistent with the expectation that Fe3+ as the predominant electron acceptor results in a community physiologically distinct from the methanogenic community. Sequence type WFeA1-06, representing 17% of the WFeA library, is essentially identical to sequence types found in several environmental clonal studies performed on diverse habitats, by our laboratory and others, as well as in a negative control (no-sample) extraction, indicating that it may be a laboratory contaminant, possibly from widely used reagents (42). The amount of biomass in the WFeA sample, as approximated by the DNA extracted from samples, was much lower (<10-fold) than in the other samples. Since the Fe horizon is at the leading edge of hydrocarbon dispersal downward in the plume, there is less carbon source to drive communities than there is in the upper horizons. Laboratory contaminants presumably have a greater chance of being detected in libraries created from low-biomass samples (42). No sequences detected in parallel negative control extractions were encountered in the other libraries analyzed (data not shown). Libraries WCHB (bacterial primers) and WCHD (archaeal primers) were created from the methanogenic CH sample. The composition of the WCHD library reinforces the results obtained with the universal methanogenic libraries, that WCHD3-03 is the dominant archaeal sequence type found in the methanogenic zone of the aquifer. Three of the dominant bacterial sequence types found in the WCHB library, comprising candidate division WS6 (Table 1), were not detected in the universal libraries, likely due to incomplete conservation of the universal 515 primer-binding site (see Fig. 4). This observation of variation in the putatively universal 515 primer-binding site indicates that different primer sets should be used in order to gauge the microbial diversity of an environment by the clonal library method or at least that universal primer 515F should not be used as the only forward primer. Covariation analysis.Sequences obtained from the environment can be valuable resources for covariation analysis of RNA structure (8). Some of the sequences detected in this study support the existence of base pairs in 16S rRNA that previously were indicated only by covariation in a limited number of sequences. Figure 4 shows the helix at positions 500 to 545 for E. coli and representatives of the WS6, OP11, and OP5 candidate divisions (16-18). Two proposed tertiary interactions (13) are indicated in Fig. 4. The only previous evidence for these tertiary interactions was the occurrence of covariations in rRNA sequences from some organelles and a few Mycoplasma spp. As shown in Fig. 4, the environmental sequences significantly expand support for the proposed interactions. 