2003). This is of great interest because n-butane, n-propane and cyclic alkanes as single substrate could not support the growth of strain HxN1, indicating that such co-metabolism of structurally diverse substrates is catalyzed by enzymes which are needed for the metabolism of the growth-supporting substrates, but exert activities on co-substrates due to “relaxed substrate specificities” similar to that observed with anaerobic alkylbenzene-degrading bacteria ( Beller and Spormann, 1999 ; Wilkes et al., 2003). Based on 16S rRNA gene sequence (Fig. 1), strain HxN1 forms a phylogenetic cluster with alkylbenzenes degrading isolates such as strains PbN1 and EbN1 (98–99% similarity). This cluster was originally described as Azoarcus species ( Rabus and Widdel, 1995 ; Rabus and Widdel, 1996) on the basis of 16S rRNA gene, but was recently reclassified as Aromatoleum species ( Wöhlbrand et al., 2007 ; Grundmann et al., 2008). Strain OcN1, however, is closely related (97–98% similarity) to pure isolates capable of anaerobic benzene degradation, e.g., Dechloromonas sp. JJ and RCB ( Coates et al. 2001). Anaerobic oxidation of long-chain n-alkanes (>C12) coupled to the reduction of nitrate is apparently restricted to members of the γ-Proteobacteria. Axenic cultures include strain HdN1 from activated sludge ( Ehrenreich et al. 2000), Marinobacter sp. BC36 and BP42 from Berre lagoon microbial mats ( Bonin et al. 2004) and the recently described denitrifying bacterium Pseudomonas balearica strain BerOc6 from a brakish lagoon ( Grossi et al. 2008). These cultured members of the γ-Proteobacteria are able to oxidize n-alkanes ranging from C14 to C20. Phylogenetic analysis, based on 16S rRNA gene sequences, shows that strain HdN1 forms its own cluster and probably represent a new lineage within the γ-Proteobacteria. Recently, molecular-based microbial community analysis of a nitrate-reducing enrichment amended with n-hexadecane as the sole source of carbon and energy revealed the dominant presence of several members of the Proteobacteria. One sequence retrieved from a DGGE profile was 82% similar to the anaerobic alkane-degrading nitrate reducer strain HdN1 ( Callaghan et al. 2009). Anaerobic oxidation of branched and cyclic alkanes has also been demonstrated to occur under nitrate-reducing conditions. Pristane (2,6,10,14-tetramethylpentadecane, C19H40), formerly regarded as recalcitrant under anaerobic conditions, has been shown to be biodegraded under nitrate-reducing conditions in enrichment cultures obtained from a diesel fuel-contaminated sediments (Bregnard et al. 1997). Within the cycloalkanes family, cyclohexane has always been the model substrate for biodegradation studies (Trower et al., 1985 ; Rouvière and Chen, 2003), however all these studies were conducted under aerobic conditions. As described above, the first direct evidence for the anaerobic oxidation of cycloalkanes, e.g., cyclopentane was found in the nitrate-reducing strain HxN1 grown anaerobically with n-alkanes from crude oil, the identity of the microorganisms capable of anaerobic degradation of cycloalkanes under nitrate-reducing conditions is still unknown. A recent study on anaerobic degradation of cyclohexane under nitrate-reducing conditions resulted in the co-enrichment of members of the δ-Proteobacteria and Planctomycetales. This enriched culture of freshwater denitrifying bacteria grown anaerobically with cyclohexane as the sole carbon and energy source was dominated by 16S rRNA gene sequence related to Geobacter spp. (∼75% of all cells as detected by phylogenetic analysis and fluorescent whole-cell hybridization using type-specific probe), the likely cyclohexane-degrader. Subsequent nitrite produced during growth of the consortium was not consumed unless extra ammonium was added to the medium. These observations indicated that the Planctomycetales (anammox bacteria) as a partner, approximating 18% of all cells, was consuming nitrite via anaerobic ammonium oxidation ( Musat et al. 