3.3. Physical modelling Experiments with inert soil presented two-phase effluents when gasoline was introduced blended with ethanol; the upper phase, A, was composed mainly of gasoline compounds, while the bottom phase, B, was aqueous. This phenomenon was not observed when gasoline alone was the contaminant: in this case a unique phase was observed (A), mainly of gasoline compounds (Fig. 7). As shown in Fig. 8, the separation of two phases was already visible in the porous medium during contaminant infiltration. Results from GC-FID analyses of effluents are shown in Table 3. When gasoline was introduced with ethanol, less BTEX were detected, suggesting that higher amounts of gasoline could have been retained in soil. However, the amounts measured in effluents probably underestimate real quantities because of losses by volatilisation during sample handling. Results from column studies with inert soil show the same behaviour and tendencies as those of these studies (Siniscalchi, 2006). When gasoline enters unsaturated soil, several physical, chemical and microbiological processes affect its distribution and persistence (Fig. 9). The presence of ethanol in gasoline may change those processes substantially as suggested by the results of the study described in the present paper. Schematic representation of processes acting on BTEX fate following soil… Download full-size image Fig. 9. Schematic representation of processes acting on BTEX fate following soil contamination. When LNAPLs are introduced into unsaturated soil and subjected to head gradients, their progress displaces air from soil pores, characterising the advance of a wetting front. However, not all air is displaced and a residual amount remains entrapped. If water saturation is low, as in our experiments, forces acting on water are too strong for it to be expelled. A fraction of the mass contaminants may be retained by capillarity and soil pores may be partially occupied by LNAPLs, while gasoline partly solubilises in pore water. Inside soil pores water is the wetting phase, thus interactions between soil particles and contaminants may be prevented and contaminants then form a film over water and are more easily drained or volatilised. These physical processes seem to be largely regulated by the amounts of soil residual water and organic matter (Haydn et al., 1997). When ethanol-blended gasoline is introduced into soil, air is still dislodged and a fraction of the mass contaminants are also retained by capillary forces. However, the movement of gasoline compounds and ethanol changes because of the latter's high solubility in water as well as its solubilising effect on BTEX (Adam et al., 2002; Corseuil et al., 1998; Rice et al., 1999). As it solubilises in soil water, ethanol changes its interfacial pressure causing water to be more easily dislocated. On the other hand, BTEX solubility in water is enhanced because of co-solvency induced by ethanol (Rice et al., 1999). Therefore, the properties and behaviour of water laden with gasoline change as well as the forces acting on soil–water–gasoline interfaces. Thus, BTEX-containing water is drained in much more important proportions. This results in such elevated amounts of BTEX in the effluent that gasoline-laden water and gasoline compounds would separate in two phases, as observed in our tank experiments. 