In a similar manner, the aquifer sediments evaluated in this study also had little intrinsic potential to degrade MTBE. MTBE was only rapidly degraded in the aquifer sediments when HS were added and when Fe(III) concentrations were maintained at high levels. Based on previous studies of the oxidation of organic matter coupled to Fe(III) oxide reduction in the presence of HS (25, 27, 28, 36), the degradation of MTBE in the presence of added HS and Fe(III) is assumed to result from Fe(III)-reducing microorganisms oxidizing MTBE with the transfer of electrons to HS. Once reduced, the HS can abiotically transfer electrons to the Fe(III). This regenerates the HS to the oxidized form. Thus, HS promote electron shuttling to Fe(III) in a catalytic manner and small amounts of HS can continue to promote Fe(III) reduction through multiple reduction and oxidation cycles. Studies with laboratory cultures have demonstrated the potential for HS to serve as an electron shuttle to Fe(III) oxides in this manner (25, 27, 37). It has also previously been demonstrated that the addition of HS or the HS analog, AQDS, can stimulate the reduction of Fe(III) in sediments (28, 38), accompanied by the growth of Fe(III)-reducing microorganisms (39). This strategy has been used to promote degradation of other recalcitrant compounds (21, 36, 40). The studies with the aquatic sediments provided preliminary evidence that anaerobic MTBE degradation coupled to the reduction of a variety of electron acceptors may be possible. In the absence of other amendments, [14C]-MTBE was converted to 14CO2 and 14CH4. The addition of Fe(III) with or without HS or AQDS inhibited the production of 14CH4, presumably the result of Fe(III)-reducing microorgan isms outcompeting methanogenic microorganisms for electron donors (41). Although the highest rates of MTBE oxidation were observed in some of the sediment samples amended with HS or AQDS, the high variability in the rate of MTBE oxidation within the different treatments made it impossible to determine whether the addition of HS significantly stimulated MTBE oxidation. The least variability was seen in Fe(III)-only amended bottles, but more research is needed to determine if Fe(III) has a stimulatory effect on MTBE degradation. High variability in the rate of MTBE degradation in replicate samples of sediments from within the same site has been observed previously (30, 32). A similar phenomenon was reported in studies in which benzene degradation was stimulated in aquifer sediments with Fe(III) chelators (23). The reasons for this variability have yet to be investigated in detail. However, a likely explanation is that the populations involved in the degradation of the contaminants are initially very small. In this case, heterogeneities in the sediments might result in much lower numbers of the appropriate organisms in one sample rather than another. Thus, the time necessary to build up a sufficiently large population of organisms that can degrade the contaminants may vary between sediments, resulting in a significant difference in the lag period prior to detectable degradation of the contaminant. Anaerobic Degradation of TBA. An additional concern resulting from contamination of groundwater with gasoline amended with oxygenates is whether TBA will be degraded. TBA may be a product of MTBE degradation (6, 30), and/or an original component of the gasoline (42). Several studies have concluded that TBA is only slowly degraded or persists under anaerobic conditions (5, 35, 30, 32). To our knowledge the results presented here provide the first indication that TBA can be rapidly degraded under strict anaerobic condi tions. The rates of TBA degradation reported here under anaerobic conditions are comparable to those previously reported for aerobic degradation in TBA-adapted sediments (5). [14C]-TBA was converted to a combination of 14CH4 and 14CO2. If TBA was converted to methane and carbon dioxide solely according to the reaction then it would be expected that 14CH4 and 14CO2 would be produced in a ratio of 3:1. However, the results with [2-14C]-acetate suggested that methanogenesis was not the only terminal electron-accepting process taking place in these sediments. 