As with SIP, synthesizing complex organic compounds is challenging and requires safety precautions, because of the radioactive label. Alternatively, heterotrophic growth can be studied by incubating environmental samples with an unlabelled substrate in the presence of 14CO2 (Hesselsoe et al, 2005). Because heterotrophic organisms assimilate CO2 during growth under aerobic and anaerobic conditions, this approach (HetCO2-MAR) is affordable and has the convenience of using the same labelled compound for assessing growth on multiple substrates. Such an approach has been demonstrated for pure cultures and filamentous 'Candidatus Microthrix parvicella' in activated sludge under different electron donor/acceptor combinations (Hesselsoe et al, 2005). If HetCO2-MAR is used as a discovery tool, it is important to remember that not only heterotrophic substrate-consuming but also all active autotrophic microorganisms will be labelled. The latter can be avoided by addition of specific inhibitors (Wagner et al, 2006). Drawbacks of FISH-MAR are its restriction to environments amenable to FISH and a requirement for some prior empirical knowledge of the organisms that are likely to assimilate a radioactively labelled carbon source. Without specific probes targeting active populations, only higher level phylogenetic assignments (for example, by using the ever-expanding collection of phyla-specific probes; Loy et al, 2007) of the detected radioactive cells may be possible. To achieve higher phylogenetic resolution, SIP has been used to complement FISH-MAR by identifying putative key players before identifying active populations on an individual cell basis. Combining SIP with FISH-MAR has thus far been demonstrated with denitrifying communities in wastewater that use methanol or acetate as carbon sources (Ginige et al, 2004, 2005). In both cases, probes designed against predominant phylotypes in the 13C-labelled SIP DNA successfully targeted radioactive cells with FISH-MAR. These results support SIP as a method for identifying environmentally relevant phylotypes and highlight the utility of combining SIP and FISH-MAR for linking phylogeny and function in a focussed and logical approach. If dealing with uncultured microorganisms, microbial ecologists, in most cases, use the 16S rRNA gene to classify diversity and to define units, which can be specifically recognized with molecular tools like oligonucleotide probes or PCR-primers (reviewed by Neufeld and Mohn, 2005). However, genomics and environmental metagenomics data have revealed pronounced differences in gene content of microbial strains which share identical 16S rRNA gene sequences (Konstantinidis et al, 2006) and even genomically identically strains might show dramatic differences in protein composition and physiological activity in the various microniches of an environmental sample. As a single-cell tool, MAR-FISH can decipher such ecophysiological heterogeneity within rRNA sequence types and offers in parallel spatial information on the arrangement of the individual cells relative to other community members and to abiotic environmental components. We expect that this combined information will enable microbial ecologists in the future to tackle key questions on how abiotic and biotic interactions influence the ecophysiology of individual microbial cells. Top of page The isotope array The isotope array is a powerful method that offers a level of throughput not readily afforded by FISH-MAR or SIP techniques (Adamczyk et al, 2003) and should become a useful tool for any environment that yields sufficient RNA for direct hybridization. After incubating samples with a radioactive substrate, RNA is extracted, fluorescently labelled and hybridized to rRNA probes in a microarray format. Subsequently, the microarray is analysed with a fluorescence scanner and beta microimager to reveal microbial community composition and to identify substrate-consuming community members, respectively. The applicability of this approach to complex samples was shown by Adamczyk et al (2003) who designed a simple prototype array to monitor 14C-bicarbonate incorporation into the lithoautotrophic ammonia-oxidizers of activated sludge. They indicated that the main advantages of the isotope array was the direct detection of labelled RNA from active organisms, without the potential to detect unlabelled background as can occur with DNA- and RNA-SIP. For exploiting the full potential of the isotope array approach, it would be best combined with encompassing phylochips (Loy et al, 2005) or even high-density DNA microarrays (Brodie et al, 2007), but at least the latter option will have to await the development of beta microimagers with higher spatial resolution. However, even if microarrays with larger spot sizes are applied, the isotope array approach should be ideally suited to decipher microbial food webs in complex microbial communities by performing experiments at different time points after incubation of the sample with the labelled substrate. Top of page Other techniques in development Raman microscopy and its combination with FISH Raman confocal microscopy employs an excitation laser incident on samples to measure the vibrational energy of chemical bonds. The scattered laser light is captured by a charge-coupled device camera, and a spectrum is obtained that has discernable peaks for different biological molecules in the cell. When tested on single microbial cells, the peaks in the Raman spectra corresponding to phenylalanine, proteins and nucleic acids were 'red-shifted' by the incorporation of 13C-labelled substrate (Huang et al, 2004). The magnitude of this red shift was independent of bacterial species tested and corresponded to the proportion of label. Nucleic acids with only 20% 13C incorporation were clearly discernable from 100% 12C-fed cells (Huang et al, 2007). As the optical resolution of Raman microscopy (approx1 mum) is similar to that of FISH, the two methods are conceivably complementary. 