The assumption that such consortia exist was further supported by the discovery of specific, strongly 13C-depleted lipids and lipid-associated compounds, such as crocetane (2,6,11,15-tetramethylhexadecane), in the zone of anaerobic methane oxidatio. In addition, 16S rRNA gene sequences retrieved from this zone indicated the presence of a distinct group of the Methanosarcinales. Furthermore, whole-cell hybridization assays with 16S rRNA-targeted fluorescent probes in anoxic sediment samples from a marine gas hydrate area revealed cell aggregates of archaea surrounded by bacteria; they exhibited close relationships to Methanosarcinales and sulphate-reducers of the Desulfosarcina branch (δ-Proteobacteria), respectively. The volume-related anaerobic methane oxidation rate in the studied gas hydrate area (up to 5×10−3mol dm−3 day−) was high in comparison to methane oxidation rates in many other sediments (between 1×10−6 and 67×10−6mol dm−3 day−1 5 ). Specific rates calculated per biomass (dry mass) of consortia in the sediment were also strikingly high (42×10−3mol g−1 day−1). This is within the range of specific rates of various SRB growing with various organic substrates under optimum conditions in the laboratory 5. ;. The free-energy change (ΔG) of anaerobic methane oxidation according to: Full-size image (<1 K) is usually less negative (less exergonic) than about −40 kJ mol−1 CH4 or SO42− 5. ;. If one assumes an approximately equal energy share between the partners, the partial pressure of hydrogen as an intermediate would correspond to a dissolved concentration in the range of 10−9M H2 (calculated for 25°C; at an in situ temperature of ∼5°C the concentration would be even lower). On the basis of calculated diffusive fluxes [39] and roughly estimated substrate utilization kinetics [5], such low hydrogen concentrations do not easily offer an explanation for the high methane oxidation rates. Experimental evidence for hydrogen production from methane could not be provided [40]. Other organic compounds utilized by Methanosarcinales, and thus presenting hypothetical products of reverse methanogenesis (e.g., acetate and methanol), would be at least as problematic to account for the observed anaerobic methane oxidation rates. Formate as an intermediate could be present at kinetically more favourable concentrations [39]. It is true that formate as electron donor is regarded as energetically nearly equivalent to H2. However, their standard states underlying such energetic calculations are different. The standard state of H2 is 101Pa (1 atm), which is in equilibrium with dissolved concentrations of ∼1 mM. The standard state of formate is the dissolved state with an activity of 1, corresponding to approximately 1 M. Hence, formate concentrations can be significantly higher (depending on the CO2/HCO3– concentration) than energetically equivalent dissolved hydrogen concentrations and thus an attractive explanation is that formate acts as a shuttle for carrying reducing equivalents between syntrophic partners. In the case of the consortia, one would have to explain how formate can be formed by Methanosarcinales despite the fact that none of the members of this group is able to utilize this compound. The use of a redox-active biomolecule other than a typical growth substrate as a shuttle for reducing equivalents between syntrophic partners has been suggested for an anaerobic coculture that oxidises acetate [41]. For any interspecies transfer of reducing equivalents, a shuttle with a midpoint potential close to that of the partial reactions of the partners would be kinetically most advantageous. If one assumes that all eight reducing equivalents (electrons) formed from one molecule of methane are transported singly or in pairs via the same shuttle mechanism, the redox potential (Einsitu) of the partial reaction (if viewed as being in equilibrium) of each partner under the actual conditions can be calculated: Full-size image (<1 K) Full-size image (<1 K) (The in situ conditions underlying the calculated values are indicated in Fig. 3, which also depicts these redox potentials at pH7.5 as assumed here. E0′ refers to standard conditions except for H+ activity [=10−7].) An electron shuttle (X) with a midpoint potential near to or in the above range (i.e., not far from −0.270V) could be operative without an extremely high or an extremely low ratio between the concentrations (activities) of the oxidized and reduced form (viz. [Xoxidized]/[Xreduced], according to the Nernst equation). On the other hand, such a shuttle would have to be kept in tight association with the cell surfaces to avoid diffusive loss. The hydrophobic cofactor methanophenazine (estimated midpoint potential close to −0.255V), which has been detected as an electron transport component (in addition to a cytochrome) in a pure culture of Methanosarcina [42], appears as one candidate that could, in principle, be part of an interspecies electron-transfer system. Different working hypotheses for the interaction between methane-utilising and sulphate-reducing microorganisms are summarized in Fig. 5. In addition to the low net free-energy change and kinetic restrictions in the electron shuttle, the high activation energy of methane presents another obstacle that has to be overcome during anaerobic oxidation (see Conclusions). 