The underlying mechanism has been suggested to comprise a simultaneous homolytic C–H cleavage at the subterminal carbon of two palmitate molecules by a B12 enzyme, followed by condensation of the radical-carrying chains [51]. This reaction involves a net production of two hydrogen atoms (presumably in the form of free 5′-deoxyadenosine) per molecule of diabolic acid. Benzene Evidence for the anaerobic degradation of benzene, the most stable aromatic hydrocarbon, has been provided by studies with enriched populations in or from sediments containing different electron acceptors. A sediment-free sulphate-reducing consortium was analyzed on the basis of 16S rRNA gene sequences (Fig. 4) [54]. To date no pure cultures of bacteria have been described that degrade benzene anaerobically. The mechanism of the initial reaction of benzene degradation in the absence of molecular oxygen is unknown. Initiation by abstraction of a hydrogen atom to yield a phenyl radical would require an activation energy even higher than in the case of methane (Fig. 8). Benzene activation may, therefore, involve another activation principle. Toluene The anaerobic biodegradation of hydrocarbons has been most intensely studied with toluene. In comparison with other aromatic (or saturated) hydrocarbons, toluene allows the relatively rapid growth of microorganisms (doubling time ≥6 h). The study of anaerobic toluene degradation has provided important clues as to our understanding of anaerobic hydrocarbon metabolism. Details have been reviewed recently and within the scope of the present article discussion of this topic is restricted to essentials. The first evidence for anaerobic toluene degradation came from studies with aquifer columns containing nitrate as electron acceptor [56]. Anaerobic toluene degradation was then repeatedly demonstrated in enriched microcosms with various electron acceptors, in pure cultures of newly isolated bacteria that reduce iron(III) [57], nitrate or sulphate, in a binary (syntrophic) culture reducing external fumarate to succinate [68], and in an anoxygenic phototroph. The identification of benzylsuccinate in a toluene-degrading sulphate-reducing enrichment culture [70] as well as in a denitrifying strain [71] was an important discovery and formed the basis for the elucidation of the anaerobic metabolism of toluene and other hydrocarbons. It could be shown that benzylsuccinate was not a by-product, but the initial intermediate formed from toluene and fumarate in a carbon–carbon addition reaction that did not require other cosubstrates (Fig. 6b) [72]. Formation of the same product was also demonstrated in a phototrophic and an enriched methanogenic [18] culture. Stereochemical analysis in denitrifying bacteria showed the formation of R(+)-benzylsuccinate 73. ; 74.. Experiments with deuterium-labelled toluene revealed that the hydrogen/deuterium atom that has to be removed before toluene can be added to fumarate is retained in the product [73]. Structural and mechanistic properties of the toluene-activating enzyme, benzylsuccinate synthase, were elucidated by genetic and enzymatic [76] approaches. One of the structural genes (Fig. 9) revealed a region with high similarity to genes encoding pyruvate formate lyase (PFL) and class III ribonucleotide reductase (RNR) the latter two are known to involve glycyl radicals in the polypeptide chain. Purified benzylsuccinate synthase from Thauera aromatica (strain K172) was recognized as a heterohexamer (α2β2γ2) with a native molecular mass of 200kDa [76]. The presence of a glycyl radical was further confirmed by protein fragmentation upon exposure to oxygen [76], and by a characteristic EPR signal in T. aromatica strains (J Heider, personal communication). Furthermore, the gene encoding the putative, activating (radical-generating) enzyme was detected on the basis of sequence similarities with the activator genes of PFL and RNR. The occurrence of a glycyl radical in biochemical reactions was originally detected in PFL, which catalyses the mechanistically unusual cleavage of pyruvate (+ coenzyme A) into acetyl-CoA and formate in a number of fermentative bacteria [78]. 