Monounsaturated trans isomer fatty acids are enriched in the phospholipids of aerobic microbial populations when exposed to aromatic hydrocarbons (Heipieper et al. 1994). There was little propensity for anaerobic mineralisation of benzene in At the end of the wet season, when the vadose soils contained considerably more water, TPH was much higher in the profile (Figure 5). This occurred because greater water saturation in the soil profile limited the penetration of oxygen from the surface (Davis et al. 2000). Intrinsic remediation of aromatic vapours in the vadose zone above gasoline-contaminated water seems to generally occur, provided there are no impediments to the transport of gases. With greater saturation of the soil, TPH was higher in the profile (Figure 5). Moseley and Meyer (1992) showed that above hydrocarbon-contaminated groundwater, greater accumulation of soil gas aromatic hydrocarbons occurred under paved areas and building structures than under non-built-up areas. This resulted in substantial leakage of benzene into the building structures and the crawl space beneath the floors. For intrinsic remediation of hydrocarbon vapours in the soil profile above contaminated groundwater, natural ventilation of the soil profile must not be impeded, since this will slow biodegradation and the containment of vapours within the vadose zone. Except for the transport of benzene in groundwater, intrinsic remediation by microbial populations prevents the extensive transport of aromatic hydrocarbons in the aquifer or the vadose zone on the Swan Coastal Plain. This is consistent with the findings of many studies conducted in many different aquifers. The transport of benzene in the groundwater on the Swan Coastal Plain is of concern, however addition of oxygen or nitrate in the benzene plume could be undertaken as a final remediation measure. It remains unclear why benzene mineralisation can occur under sulfate-reducing conditions in some aquifers but not others. Although the fate of the aromatic hydrocarbons, and the microbial processes involved in their mineralisation can be inferred through geochemical analysis and transport modeling, measurement of microbial activities using radio-labeled compounds increased our understanding of the processes and potential rates of mineralisation of the pollutants. The analysis of microbial populations through phospholipid-derived signatures and biomass estimates provided insight into the microbial populations in the soil profile above hydrocarbon-contaminated groundwater (Table 6), however signature analysis in the contaminated groundwater plume provided little useful information (Franzmann et al. 1996). The use of fluorescently labelled polyclonal antibodies for tracing specific bacterial strains of Desulfosporosinus meridiei in the groundwater was greatly superior to the use of rRNA-directed FISH probes. The methodology for the application of FISH is rapidly improving through the use of new dyes, probes and image analysis techniques (Daims et al. 1999), however the successful use of FISH to describe microbial communities in slow moving groundwaters has not been demonstrated and will perhaps remain a practical challenge for some time. 