In the vicinity of the gasoline contaminated site, the groundwater velocity was between 100 and 170 m year−1, effective porosity was between 0.26 to 0.3 m3 m−3, and the hydraulic conductivity ranged from 8.6 to 29 m day−1 (Davis et al. 1999). Petroleum contamination of the aquifer from a leaking underground petroleum storage tank (UST) was discovered in 1990. Sample collection multiports (MP) (Davis et al. 1992) were installed that allowed water collection from 0.2 or 0.5 m depths at specific sites along the flow path of the contamination and the contamination plume was monitored over a five year period. There were minor variations in the position of the plume over the years, and typical maps of benzene concentration, toluene concentration and sulfate concentration in the groundwater are given in Figure 2, along with the positioning of the multiport sample sites. In addition to toluene and benzene, the plume contained ethylbenzene, m- and p- xylene, o-xylene, 1,3,5-trimethyl benzene and naphthalene in significant concentrations. In April 1991, the benzene plume extended over 420 m from the site of initial contamination (past MP8), whereas the toluene plume was less than 250 m long (it had disappeared before MP7, Figure 2). M- and p-xylene and ethylbenzene were also detectable 420 m down the plume whereas o-xylene, 1,3,5-trimethylbenzene and naphthalene were not. Retardation coefficients due to sorption for benzene and toluene in aquifer material from this site are very similar, 1.02 and 1.05, respectively, (Thierrin et al. 1993). The limited retardation with respect to a conservative bromide tracer probably resulted from the very low organic carbon content in these sands (0.008–0.02%, Patterson et al. 1993). Truncation of the toluene plume with respect to the benzene plume (Figure 2) could not be explained in terms of the differences in the physical attributes of toluene versus benzene. The distribution of these two contaminants in the plume would be consistent with preferential biodegradation of toluene. The concomitant loss of sulfate with the truncation of the toluene plume (Figure 2) provides geochemical evidence for toluene mineralisation linked to sulfate reduction as the terminal step in toluene mineralisation, especially as methane was not detected in the groundwater from within the plume (Davis et al. 1999). Groundwaters on the Swan Coastal Plain are generally anoxic. The concentrations of potential electron acceptors and their reduction products in the groundwater are given in Table 1. Analyses of cores from outside the plume showed that, at the depths at which the contamination occurred, extractible Fe(III) was at concentrations generally <200 µg g−1, and was not extractable in 0.5 M HCl, but was extractable in 5.0 M HCl (Prommer et al. 1999). This would suggest that most of the Fe(III) occurred in a highly crystalline Table 1. Average concentrations of some potential electron donors and their reduction products both within and outside the hydrocarbon contamination plume (Davis et al. 1999). Minimal nitrate occurred in uncontaminated background groundwater near the site but appreciably more sulfate was available as a terminal electron acceptor for anaerobic respiration of the contaminants (Table 1). In the uncontaminated groundwater, nitrate concentrations averaged 0.18 mg N l−1 (ca. 0.01 mM) and sulfate concentrations averaged 27.5 mg S −1 (ca. 0.86 mM). Stoichiometric equations for the oxidation of toluene using nitrate and sulfate are given in Equations (1) and (2) (see Borden et al. 