Therefore, refineries using fluid catalytic cracking to produce gasoline components are concerned with sulfur reduction in gasoline (28). We found that the range of substrates utilized as sulfur sources by M. goodii X7B is quite broad. Besides BTH and DBT, strain X7B could also grow by using alkylated BTHs, alkylated DBTs, thiophene carboxylic acid, thiophene acetic acid, 3,3′-thiodipropionic acid, and propylmercaptan as sole sulfur sources (Table 1). The major problem with the deep desulfurization of gasoline is that conventional hydrodesulfurization technology results in a significant reduction in the octane number due to the saturation of olefins in naphtha from fluid catalytic cracking (21, 28). Also, thiophenic compounds such as BTH, thiophene, and their derivates, as well as thiol, are major sulfur compounds in gasoline (23). If BDS can be applied effectively to gasoline, the refiner will be offered a less expensive alternative to HDS that also avoids the drawback of octane degradation. Furthermore, BDS will significantly reduce energy requirements and, consequently, the environmental impact brought about by gasoline combustion (20). The process challenges to developing gasoline BDS lie primarily in reactor design, especially that for oil separations (4, 28). The process must also minimize the problems associated with the toxicity of gasoline to the biocatalyst. Most BDS processes are triphasic systems containing cells, water, and oil (7, 15, 28). It is very difficult to separate oil and water from the emulsified oil. In this study, the immobilized-cell system adopted for BDS made it easier to separate oil from the reaction system and greatly minimized the toxicity of gasoline to the biocatalyst. Chang et al. immobilized Gordona sp. strain CYKS1 and Nocardia sp. strain CYKS2 in Celite for the desulfurization of light gas oil (3). Naito et al. entrapped R. erythropolis KA2-5-1 cells in a photo-cross-linkable prepolymer (ENT-4000) for model oil (n-tetradecane) desulfurization (26). Pseudomonas delafieldii R-8 was immobilized on magnetic polyvinyl alcohol beads, and a diesel oil desulfurization reaction was performed. After desulfurization, immobilized cells could be easily separated magnetically from the BDS reactor (29). Encapsulation provided the bacterial cells with a protective solid barrier, which may have somewhat limited the diffusion of gasoline hydrocarbons, reducing the bioavailable concentration in the inner space of the beads with respect to that in the bulk liquid (25). However, according to our knowledge, no studies using immobilized cells for gasoline biodesulfurization have ever been reported. In this study, calcium alginate was selected for cell immobilization, and the biocatalyst prepared from X7B possesses a broad substrate specificity toward organic sulfur compounds in gasoline. We are currently investigating the enzymatic and genetic characteristics of this moderately thermophilic bacterium. 