A For the BIOLOG data, average well color development (AWCD) was calculated as described by Garland et al. (2001). The Shannon index, McIntosh index, and richness of soil microbial communities were used to measure species metabolic diversity. A The Shannon index and McIntosh index were calculated according to Liu et al. (2006). Richness refers to the total number of carbon sources utilized in GN plates. Extraction of soil samples DCM and dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) were used to extract the soil according to the method of Grazyna et al. (2005). Briefly, aliquots of 5 g pulverized soil were extracted for 24 h in a Soxhlet extractor with DCM. A The extracts were reduced to 5 ml in a rotary evaporator and then 5 ml DMSO was added. A The mixture was evaporated under reduced pressure to 5 ml. The method is based on the analysis of reduction in light emission by Photobacterium phosphoreum T3 under toxic stress. A Soil DCM/DMSO extracts and DMSO (control) were tested. A All bioassays were carried out in triplicate and light output was measured using a portable luminometer (Model DXY-2). The luminometer and P. A phosphoreum T3 were obtained from the Institute of Soil Science, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Nanjing. A Toxicity results were reported as the effective concentration promoting a 50% reduction (EC50) in light emitted by the bacteria. A The full experimental procedure was described by Bundy et al. (2004). Briefly, P. A phosphoreum T3 suspensions (100 μl) were added to mixtures containing 100 μl DMSO extract, 200 μl 15% (w/v) NaCl solution, and 600 μl distilled water. A Luminescence was read at 20°C after 15 min. The soil was black in color before bioremediation due to heavy oily sludge contamination and lack of vegetation. A This may be due to a relatively low WHC in the presence of a large amount of oil, inhibiting seed germination. A However, after bioremediation thinly scattered wild plants, such as Eleusine indica (L.) Gaertn. A and Echinochloa crusgalli (L.) Beauv, etc., were observed. A This was attributed mainly to the increase in the WHC, resulting from the substantial reduction of oil content in the soil due to microbial biodegradation (Table 1). Hydrocarbon degradation The chemical composition and percentage decrease of TPH in the contaminated soil collected at 0 and 360 days from the from control and treated plots are shown in Table 2. A Initially, the TPH concentration in the treated and control soil (0–30 cm horizon) was 241 and 251 g kg−1 dry soil, respectively. A After 360 days of bioremediation it was reduced to 101 g kg−1 dry soil in the treated plot, a reduction of 58.2% compared with 15.6% in the control plot. A The removal of various fractions of TPH is also shown in Table 2. 