Only one example of toluene degradation was seen in one of the unpolluted sediments (TKT- site water), however, and none of the other aromatics was lost. The rapid utilization of toluene under all reducing conditions is consistent with many reports in the literature, including Ball & Reinhard (1996), Barbaro et al (1992), Reinhard et al (1997) and especially Langenhoff et al (1996) who showed that in columns filled with mixed, polluted sediments, toluene degradation took place under denitrifying, sulfidogenic, methanogenic, iron-reducing, and manganese-reducing conditions. There were no organic-rich, unpolluted sediments or organic-poor, polluted sediments included in this study, so it is not possible to distinguish between the effects of these two factors. Differences in substrate utilization due to the available electron acceptor were evident in both the AK and OL enrichments. The most rapid loss of any compounds occurred when nitrate was added as the terminal electron acceptor, but the loss was most extensive Iron-reducing activity was similar to denitrifying, with the exception of o-xylene being degraded instead of p-xylene. These differences are in contrast to the results of Reinhard et al. (1997), who found that at one site all of the BTEX compounds, with the exception of benzene, were degraded under both denitrifying and sulfidogenic conditions. The degradation of toluene, ethylbenzene, m-xylene and sometimes p-xylene, without loss of benzene or o-xylene, in denitrifying enrichments has been reported numerous times however (Hutchins et al. 1991, 1991b; Rabus & Widdel 1995). Interestingly, but not surprisingly, toluene was the first compound to be lost in all cultures. toluene was followed by ethylbenzene and m-xylene in denitrifying cultures and o- and m-xylene in sulfidogenic cultures (AK). Benzene was the last compound utilized. Edwards et al. (1992) also found toluene and m-xylene to be the preferred substrates when BTEX was fed to a sulfate-reducing enrichment. They found, in contrast to our results however, that o-xylene was consumed after p-xylene. In denitrifying cultures from both AK and OL there is some evidence that o-xylene is being cometabolized during toluene degradation. The concentration of o-xylene decreased approximately 10% relative to the sterile controls during the first three weeks of incubation (when toluene degradation was occurring), but did not change afterwards. In sub-cultures of the AK enrichment, the addition of more toluene resulted in a further decrease in o-xylene concentrations (data not shown). This type of cometabolism was observed by Evans et al. (1991) in enrichment cultures and, later, in a pure culture of strain T1 (Evans et al. 1991b). The transformation of o-xylene in T1 was tied to the production of 2-methyl-benzylsuccinate by the enzymes responsible for toluene metabolism (Evans et al. 1992). Apparent cometabolism has since been reported in other studies of denitrifying systems (Ball & Reinhard 1996; Kao & Borden 1997), and the by-products have been isolated from contaminated groundwater, where sulfate was the terminal electron acceptor (Beller et al. 1995). Though cometabolism cannot be completely excluded from these consortia, o-xylene metabolism began only after toluene was exhausted, suggesting that it was not the dominant mechanism of degradation. It is significant that benzene  degradation was only observed in cultures from one site (AK), and only under sulfidogenic conditions. Benzene degradation has previously been shown to occur with sulfate as the terminal electron acceptor in four separate studies, one of which used the Arthur Kill as its sediment source (Kazumi et al. 1997). 