The purpose of this study was to use a multifaceted approach, including biodegradation studies, molecular phylogenetic approaches, lipid analysis, and culturing studies, to analyze the microbial community associated with benzene oxidation at the Bemidji aquifer. The results suggest that a narrow phylogenetic group of organisms within the Geobacter cluster (22) play an important role in the benzene-oxidizing community. Study site and sample collection. Sediment samples were collected from the U.S. Geological Survey Groundwater Toxics Site at Bemidji, Minn. This site is located in a remote forested area and was contaminated in 1979 when a pipeline transporting crude oil burst (19). An anaerobic contaminant plume containing BTEX compounds has formed downgradient from the crude oil source. The contaminated portion of the aquifer is composed of fairly homogeneous, sandy to coarse-grained sediments (19), making it an ideal site for groundwater contaminant research. In addition, considerable information is available regarding contaminant composition, hydrogeological conditions, and geochemical conditions at this site (43). Samples were collected in 1996 and 1997 as previously described (4) from several locations along the contaminant gradient and from an uncontaminated site. Sites IR-1, IR-2, and IR-3 were sediments in which Fe(III) reduction was the terminal-electron-accepting process (TEAP), with site IR-1 being closest to the contaminant source. Sites IR-1, IR-2, and IR-3 correspond to sites 97-1, 97-2, and 97-3, respectively, as identified in a previous study at this site (4). Sediments 96-1 are Fe(III)-reducing sediments collected in 1996. Methanogenic sediments were sampled closer to the source of contamination and uncontaminated sediments were recovered from a nearby site just outside the contaminant plume. At each site, sediments from a depth of approximately 9 to 10 m were collected aseptically from drilling cores (34) and were held anoxically on ice during overnight transport to the laboratory. Sediment samples were homogenized and divided into aliquots for subsequent manipulations in an N2-filled glove bag. For enrichment cultures, 1 to 2 g of sediment was added to pressure tubes for later dilution as described below. For phospholipid fatty acid (PLFA) and molecular analyses, 100 g of sediment was transferred to sterile conical tubes and stored at 280°C. The TEAP at each of these sites was confirmed with geochemical and activity measurements as previously described (4, 5). Sediments from sites IR-3 and 96-1 mineralized benzene under in situ conditions (5). Anaerobic oxidation of benzene was measured with [14C]benzene as previously described (4). Enrichment cultures. Enrichment cultures of benzene-oxidizing Fe(III) reducers were developed with inocula collected from site 96-1. Cells were released from sediment particles and diluted in Fe(III) reducer medium as previously described (4, 29), except that 140 mM benzene was used as the electron donor. Briefly, the medium contained poorly crystalline Fe(III) oxide (30 mM) as an electron acceptor, 4 mM nitrilotriacetic acid as an Fe(III) chelator, and 1.3 mM Fe(II) chloride as a reductant. Initial dilution tubes also contained 0.1% pyrophosphate in order to release cells bound to sediment particles (7). Mostprobable- number (MPN) tubes were incubated at 25°C for 2 months prior to enumeration. Utilization of benzene was determined by monitoring benzene removal in the headspace of inoculated tubes relative to uninoculated controls. Benzene concentrations were determined by gas chromatography. Benzene mineralization was also monitored by adding [14C]benzene ([U-14C]benzene, 58.2 mCi/mmol; Sigma Radiochemicals, St. Louis, Mo.) 