Effect of ethanol on the biodegradation of gasoline in an unsaturated tropical soil

    Patricia Österreicher-Cunhaa, , , , Eurípedes do Amaral Vargas Jr.a, Jean Rémy Davée Guimarãesb, Gabriel Paiva Lagoa, Franklin dos Santos Antunesa, Maria Isabel Pais da Silvac

    a Departamento de Engenharia Civil, Pontifícia Universidade Católica do Rio de Janeiro, PUC-Rio, Rua Marquês de São Vicente 225-301L, CEP 22451-900 Rio de Janeiro, Brazil
    b Instituto de Biofísica Carlos Chagas F°., Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro, UFRJ. Centro de Ciências da Saúde, Bl.G, Ilha do Fundão. CEP 21949-900 Rio de Janeiro, Brazil
    c Departamento de Química, Pontifícia Universidade Católica do Rio de Janeiro, PUC-Rio. Rua Marquês de São Vicente 225-371L. CEP 22451-900 Rio de Janeiro, Brazil

    Received 1 February 2008, Revised 11 September 2008, Accepted 11 September 2008, Available online 18 November 2008

Abstract

Leaking underground storage tanks are a worldwide problem nowadays, therefore gasoline degradation and distribution in the subsurface have been widely studied. Brazil is the only country to currently use ethanol as fuel and as an oxygenate additive to gasoline, in amounts varying from 20 to 26% v/v. Consequently, both gasoline and ethanol may contaminate the environment when spills and leaks occur. Some authors suggest that despite the high degradability of gasoline, its degradation in the aquifer is hindered by the preferential biodegradation of ethanol, which would delay gasoline degradation; however, processes in the unsaturated zone are far less understood. The present study concentrates on degradation and distribution processes of ethanol-amended gasoline in tropical soil under unsaturated conditions. A multi-parametrical approach was adopted to assess the effects of ethanol on the fate of gasoline. Undisturbed natural soil was used to evaluate biodegradation processes while tank experiments determined differences in infiltration, distribution and retention of gasoline in unsaturated artificial porous medium. Physical, chemical and microbiological results suggest that ethanol enhances BTEX retention in soil, boosts microbial activity but delays BTEX biodegradation.
Keywords

    Ethanol-amended gasoline; Unsaturated soil; Biodegradation; Microbial activity

1. Introduction

The demand for alternative fuels and gasoline oxygenated additives has been increasing worldwide, driven mostly by the need to address growing problems linked to the availability and cost of fossil fuels and atmospheric pollution. Following the petroleum crisis in the 1970s, Brazil implemented a programme for the replacing of fossil fuel by renewable ethanol extracted from sugar-cane (Kheshgi et al., 2000 ;  Moreira and Goldemberg, 1999). The advantages and drawbacks of using ethanol as fuel and gasoline oxygenate have been largely investigated in several different aspects. These studies have been further stimulated by the implementation in 1990, in the USA, of the Clean Air Act, which requires the phasing out of MTBE as a fuel oxygenate by 2005 and its replacement by ethanol (Federal Register, 2000), because of MTBE's poor degradability and the foul taste and odour it gives to water (Dakhel et al., 2003 ;  EA, 1999). Areas of recent interest are, among others, the fate and distribution of ethanol and ethanol-blended gasoline in the environment, their degradability in different environmental compartments and conditions, as well as the effects the presence of ethanol could have on the movement and degradation of gasoline compounds (e.g. Adam et al., 2002; Corseuil et al., 1998; Lago, 2004 ;  Ruiz-Aguilar et al., 2002). Life cycle sustainability and energy balance, atmospheric benefits, ethanol and gasohol engine efficiency, all resulting from the use of gasoline oxygenates, and ethanol in particular, are undeniable (Jeuland et al., 2004 ;  Kheshgi et al., 2000); however, issues have come up concerning ground water contamination and the biodegradability of ethanol-amended gasoline in the environment.

Ethanol's properties affect the infiltration, distribution, retention and final biodegradation of gasoline compounds (e.g. Adam et al., 2002 ;  McDowell and Powers, 2003; Reckhorn et al., 2001 ;  Ulrich, 1999). Because of its hydrophilicity, ethanol partitions almost immediately and completely into the aqueous phase, thus increasing the solubility of gasoline in water (the phenomenon of co-solvency), also reducing interfaces and surface tensions. Therefore, these processes alter the overall interactions and equilibrium between water, gasoline and soil particles. Laboratory experiments with inert soil have shown that, as ethanol-amended gasoline infiltrates into the vadose zone, ethanol is retained in soil residual water while benzene, toluene, ethyl-benzene and xylenes ( BTEX, the most problematic and persistent of gasoline compounds) progress and attain the saturated zone, creating an LNAPL pool in the capillary fringe; as ethanol-laden water eventually slowly drains into the capillary fringe, the scenario is similar to that of an ethanol spill over an LNAPL plume (McDowell and Powers, 2003). Plumes of ethanol-amended gasoline have been compared to standard gasoline plumes and found to be longer for benzene (B) and toluene (T) (Ruiz-Aguilar et al., 2002); this could be due to a delayed degradation of BTEX induced by the presence of ethanol, the preferential degradation of which would deplete soil of the necessary electron acceptors for BTEX degradation (Corseuil et al., 1998 ;  da Silva and Alvarez, 2002).

However, most studies address the saturated zone, where oxygen may be available only in restricted amounts for an effective aerobic degradation of BTEX, and where water is present in important amounts. Also, experimental approaches often use inert or sandy soils, leaving relevant doubts about the effect of soil components and microbiota on the fate of gasoline and gasoline–ethanol mixtures. Processes involved in BTEX degradation in the vadose zone are still poorly understood, especially so where ethanol effects on BTEX degradation are concerned.

The objectives of these studies were to elucidate some of those processes occurring during gasoline–ethanol leaks in the vadose zone of a tropical soil, focusing on the effects of ethanol on the biodegradation of gasoline compounds as well as the importance of soil components on the fate of contaminants. Previous studies were conducted with inert and sandy soils (McDowell and Powers, 2003 ;  Dakhel et al., 2003) and have not addressed the effects the presence of ethanol may have on the biodegradation of gasoline compounds in the unsaturated zone. Other studies have evaluated the fate of blended gasoline in the saturated zone (Corseuil et al., 1998), showing a delay in gasoline degradation because of the presence of ethanol.

Furthermore, the influence of soil constituents on the fate of ethanol-blended gasoline are also unknown as most available data do not concern mechanisms occurring in natural soil, where the role of organic matter and microbial populations, for instance, are of crucial importance. Our studies focus on a residual soil of the metropolitan area of Rio de Janeiro. Almost no data are available on biodegradation of blended gasoline in tropical soils although leaks frequently occur in these soils. Residual soils are ubiquitous in Brazil and present specific geotechnical, geological and microbiological characteristics, very different from the sedimentary soils usually found in the northern hemisphere, characteristics which may be of great importance when biodegrading activities are concerned.

Monitoring of microbial numbers may be an effective tool to evaluate biodegradation processes; however, as most environmental microorganisms are not able to grow under laboratory conditions (unculturable strains), monitoring microbial biomass does not inform on the effectiveness of biodegrading activities as population shifts may happen independently of microbial activity. Thus, monitoring microbial degrading activity is an important complement to biological studies on biodegradation of xenobiotic compounds (Badiane et al., 2001; Holliger et al., 1997; Riis et al., 1998 ;  Taylor et al., 2002). Microbial parameters also allow us to evaluate whether microbial communities are being impacted by contamination and adapting so as to eventually start biodegradation processes (e.g. Brohon et al., 2001; Chaîneau et al., 2003; Daubaras and Chakraborty, 1992; Margesin et al., 2000 ;  van Straalen, 2002).

This article presents results from several experimental studies that evaluated the aerobic biodegradation and fate of ethanol-blended gasoline in unsaturated tropical soils. A multi-disciplinary approach was used to evaluate several physical, chemical and biological parameters. Experiments with inert quartz porous medium were conducted and compared to natural soil assays in order to assess the importance of soil on all processes.
2. Materials and methods
2.1. Biodegradation studies

The objective of this study was to assess the effect of ethanol on the distribution, retention and biodegradation of gasoline compounds in unsaturated tropical soil.

Laboratory studies were conducted with natural undisturbed soil in microcosms. Although data obtained with this kind of approach are not applicable to the field, results from microcosm studies are indicative of processes that may happen in the field as well as valuable tools to compare different conditions (Knacker et al., 2004 ;  van Straalen, 2002).
2.1.1. Soil

The soil used for this study is found in the metropolitan area of Rio de Janeiro, south-eastern Brazil. It is a natural unsaturated soil taken at a depth between 3 and 5 m from a weathering profile of kinzigitic gneissic rocks, comprising a young or saprolitic gneissic residual soil belonging to the pedological horizon C. At this depth, structural macroscopic features from the mother rock are preserved: samples taken for soil characterisation show randomly distributed grey and white facies, the former prevailing at the sampling depth. The grey facies of the soil that predominates in the weathering profile is sandy silt material with quartz and mica biotite as dominant minerals and kaolinite as the main clay fraction. The white facies is silty sand, with quartz and potassic feldspar as main minerals and gibbsite as clay fraction. Both facies present rather low clay content.

In this well-drained soil, air and water circulation are not likely to be easily interrupted by biomass increases or excess water input. Thus, it is probable that microbial aerobic processes prevail. The microbiological evaluation showed significant fluctuations in parameter measurements from different times of the year. The soil presents low total heterotrophic bacterial populations, low degrading activity as well as the presence of culturable gasoline degraders in the indigenous microbiota. Similar biomasses were found in both facies but soil microorganisms appear more efficient in carbon assimilation in the sandy facies (Österreicher-Cunha et al., 2007). Further geotechnical, mineralogical and microbiological details have been described elsewhere (Österreicher-Cunha et al., 2004).

Structured soil cubic blocks (30 cm3, cubical/cubic) and cylinders (20 cm i.d. 15 cm high) were collected in a slope at approximately 3 m depth and used for laboratory assays, as described by Österreicher-Cunha et al., 2004 ;  Österreicher-Cunha et al., 2007.
2.1.2. Contamination

Standard and ethanol-blended gasoline, obtained from CENPES, Petrobrás, as well as controlled BTEX and BTEX–ethanol mixtures were applied on the surface of the undisturbed soil used in the assays (Österreicher et al., 2004, 2007). BTEX and BTEX–ethanol mixtures (Table 1) were composed according to average amounts found in Brazilian gasoline (Cruz, 2002).
2.1.3. Monitoring
2.1.3.1. Chemical

Contaminants were extracted from composite soil samples by orbital shaking in methanol. Gasoline compounds and BTEX contents in soil were determined by gas chromatography using a Shimadzu chromatograph equipped with a flame ionisation detector and an AT-Wax capillary column (25 m, 0.25 mm i.d.), temperature programmed from 35 °C (5 min) to 230 °C (2 min), at a rate of 20 °C min−1.
2.1.3.2. Microbiological

Microbial parameters were evaluated prior to and after contamination. Microbial degrading activities were determined measuring fluorescein diacetate (FDA) hydrolysis, following the modified methodology described by Adam and Duncan (2001): composite soil samples were incubated with FDA and fluorescein formed by microbial hydrolytic activity was measured by spectrophotometry at 490 nm (Genesis 2 spectrophotometer, Spectronic Instruments).

Bacterial culturable heterotrophic populations were determined in composite soil samples after serial dilution in sterile distilled water; total culturable heterotrophic bacterial populations were enumerated by counting of colony forming units (CFU) in tryptone soy agar (TSA) (Oxoid) 1:10, by pour-plating (Alef, 1995).
2.1.3.3. Gravimetric

Soil weight was monitored in one 20-day assay to evaluate gain and loss of water in uncontaminated soils, as well as loss of contaminants by volatilisation in contaminated sterile dried soils.
2.1.4. Statistics

Statistical analyses of variance were performed using OpenStat®. ANOVA and Student's t test were applied in order to evaluate differences in data at 95% significance level.
2.2. Evaluation of volatilisation from natural soil

This study evaluated the losses of water and of gasoline, standard and ethanol-amended, by volatilisation, from undisturbed soil columns, evaluating the effect of soil water content on the retention of gasoline compounds. Undisturbed soil columns were collected in aluminium tubes (35 cm high, 12 cm i.d.), then used in three different water contents: natural gravimetric water content, varying from 8.40 to 9.61%, oven dried (105 °C, for at least 24 h, until constant weight was attained) and at water holding capacity. Soil columns were contaminated with ethanol-blended gasoline (1:4) then left at room temperature (around 25 °C) for 35 days while gravimetrically monitored; weight shifts showed volatilisation of contaminants and water.

Other undisturbed soil columns (17 cm high, 12 cm i.d.), at field natural water content, were contaminated with standard and ethanol-blended gasoline. The same gravimetric monitoring was performed for 7 days so as to compare gasoline and gasoline–ethanol mixture initial volatilisation.
2.3. Physical modelling of contaminant distribution and retention

The objective of these experiments was to study in a semi-quantitative manner the distribution of gasoline in the vadose zone; contaminants’ mobility and infiltration in unsaturated artificial soil were evaluated comparing the behaviours of gasoline and ethanol-amended gasoline. Contaminants were introduced in a two-dimensional (2D) glass tank and distribution images compared. Effluents were collected after drainage through the porous medium for qualitative and quantitative analyses that aimed to determine benzene and toluene retention in the soil matrix as well as the influence ethanol may have on those processes.
2.3.1. Experimental design

A glass microcosm allowed for visualisation of spills and image capture; it was composed of a glass tank 30 × 30 × 50 cm provided with a sampling port located at the bottom of the PVC frame, for the collection of effluents (Fig. 1). The tank was packed with quartz sand particles and was maintained with residual water saturation, simulating the soil vadose zone in field capacity condition. The porous medium was carefully introduced into the microcosm using a funnel and rubber hose so that the particle distribution would be as uniform as possible. Water was also introduced carefully at the surface and drained at the bottom of the container.
2.3.2. Porous media

Quartz sand (Potters) comprised the granular, homogenous medium used to fill the glass tank. The crushed quartz particles had sizes between 0.43 and 0.25 mm thus being classified as fine sand.
2.3.3. Contamination

A single pulse of contamination (standard and 20% ethanol-amended gasoline) was applied with a funnel inserted into the surface of porous medium in the glass tank (Fig. 1). The average amount introduced was 192.9 g. Contaminant progression and distribution in the medium was then filmed and photographed and effluents collected to be quantified and analysed.
2.3.4. Chemical analysis

Contaminants were analysed as described in paragraph Section 2.1.3.1.
3. Results
3.1. Biodegradation studies

Microbiological analyses detected the initial impact of contamination on culturable bacterial populations as well as the stimulation of metabolic activity caused by contamination.

Growth of culturable bacteria was inhibited by gasoline as well as by ethanol-blended gasoline contamination (Fig. 2), and resumed only when contaminant amounts were reduced (Fig. 3). The recovery of culturable populations occurred 40 days following contamination, while for gasoline–ethanol -contaminated soils, it was not observed until after the 65th day. This delayed recovery of culturable populations in soils containing ethanol-amended gasoline suggests a longer-lasting toxicity of soil when the contaminating gasoline is blended with ethanol.
In contaminated soils, the presence of contaminants increased microbial activity, probably because of biodegrading activities; the stimulation was higher and longer lasting when gasoline was introduced blended with ethanol (Fig. 4). BTEX-contaminated soils present a 50% increase in activity on the second day after contamination; levels then drop below the initial values, suggesting that the population must re-adapt to the new conditions. Ethanol-containing soils also have an increased activity on the second day (>2.5 times the initial level). This activity lasts until the 10th day, gradually dropping. An initial immediate degradation of ethanol was possibly followed by the degradation of BTEX, indicated by lower levels of activity, similar, on the fifth day after contamination, to those observed in gasoline-contaminated soils on the second day.
As shown by residue analysis, gasoline compounds were detected for a longer time in soils contaminated with ethanol mixtures (Fig. 5). It was not possible in these studies to link soil recovery, as shown by resumption of growth of culturable bacteria and the return of activity to initial levels, to threshold levels of contamination. However, measurements of degrading activities of the microbiota decreased rapidly once contamination residues were no longer detected (Figs. 4 and 5b). In sterile soils where microbial communities were eliminated by autoclaving, chemical analysis showed that BTEX residues persisted in both gasoline- and gasoline–ethanol -contaminated soils whereas they were no longer detected in non-sterile soils (Fig. 5b).

3.2. Volatilisation assays

Gravimetric monitoring of water and gasoline volatilisation from uncontaminated and contaminated soils showed that most water and contaminant volatilisation happened rapidly during the first hours after the introduction of contaminants into soil. No significant difference was observed in gasoline- and gasoline–ethanol -contaminated soils (Fig. 6). Contaminated sterile and dry soils showed between 5 and 10% weight loss in the first day of the assay, the weight remaining constant afterwards until the 20th day. These experiments showed that, despite ethanol's higher volatility, volatilisation of contaminants did not seem faster when gasoline was blended with ethanol.

3.3. Physical modelling

Experiments with inert soil presented two-phase effluents when gasoline was introduced blended with ethanol; the upper phase, A, was composed mainly of gasoline compounds, while the bottom phase, B, was aqueous. This phenomenon was not observed when gasoline alone was the contaminant: in this case a unique phase was observed (A), mainly of gasoline compounds (Fig. 7). As shown in Fig. 8, the separation of two phases was already visible in the porous medium during contaminant infiltration.
In effluents from assays with gasoline–ethanol contamination, higher contents of water were found in phase A than in the effluent from standard gasoline experiments (Table 2).
Results from GC-FID analyses of effluents are shown in Table 3. When gasoline was introduced with ethanol, less BTEX were detected, suggesting that higher amounts of gasoline could have been retained in soil. However, the amounts measured in effluents probably underestimate real quantities because of losses by volatilisation during sample handling. Results from column studies with inert soil show the same behaviour and tendencies as those of these studies (Siniscalchi, 2006).
4. Discussion

When gasoline enters unsaturated soil, several physical, chemical and microbiological processes affect its distribution and persistence (Fig. 9). The presence of ethanol in gasoline may change those processes substantially as suggested by the results of the study described in the present paper.
When LNAPLs are introduced into unsaturated soil and subjected to head gradients, their progress displaces air from soil pores, characterising the advance of a wetting front. However, not all air is displaced and a residual amount remains entrapped. If water saturation is low, as in our experiments, forces acting on water are too strong for it to be expelled. A fraction of the mass contaminants may be retained by capillarity and soil pores may be partially occupied by LNAPLs, while gasoline partly solubilises in pore water. Inside soil pores water is the wetting phase, thus interactions between soil particles and contaminants may be prevented and contaminants then form a film over water and are more easily drained or volatilised. These physical processes seem to be largely regulated by the amounts of soil residual water and organic matter (Haydn et al., 1997).

When ethanol-blended gasoline is introduced into soil, air is still dislodged and a fraction of the mass contaminants are also retained by capillary forces. However, the movement of gasoline compounds and ethanol changes because of the latter's high solubility in water as well as its solubilising effect on BTEX (Adam et al., 2002; Corseuil et al., 1998 ;  Rice et al., 1999). As it solubilises in soil water, ethanol changes its interfacial pressure causing water to be more easily dislocated. On the other hand, BTEX solubility in water is enhanced because of co-solvency induced by ethanol (Rice et al., 1999). Therefore, the properties and behaviour of water laden with gasoline change as well as the forces acting on soil–water–gasoline interfaces. Thus, BTEX-containing water is drained in much more important proportions. This results in such elevated amounts of BTEX in the effluent that gasoline-laden water and gasoline compounds would separate in two phases, as observed in our tank experiments. Despite the higher solubilisation of benzene in soil water in the presence of ethanol, this difference between the two situations (standard vs. amended-gasoline) tends to decrease with increasing soil water saturation; the lower the amounts of water, the higher the relative amounts of BTEX that are solubilised in soil water because of ethanol (Castro, 2007; Molson et al., 2002).

As contaminants progress inside the soil, they undergo volatilisation, retention and biodegradation. Contamination residues were detected in ethanol-containing soils for a longer period than in gasoline-contaminated ones, which could be explained mainly by differences in contaminant bioavailability leading to different degradation rates.

Volatilisation may contribute to the disappearance of contaminants; however, if it were the determining factor, residues would disappear faster from ethanol-contaminated soils, because of a slightly increased vapour pressure in amended gasoline. Also, if volatilisation was the only cause for the loss of contaminants, similar amounts of residues, or none, would have been detected in sterile and in non-sterile soils, in contrast with our studies.

Volatilisation of gasoline from natural structured soil showed the role of soil water content in this process. Standard gasoline tends to volatilise more easily from soils with higher water content, as water does not allow contact or interaction between gasoline and soil particles. When gasoline is blended to ethanol, the solubilising effect of the latter on BTEX modifies water characteristics as it becomes laden with BTEX. Therefore, the remaining unsolubilised gasoline–ethanol mixture may volatilise more easily, as more BTEX are retained in soil water.

An easier and faster volatilisation would also be expected for ethanol-blended gasoline because of a higher vapour pressure caused by ethanol. Ethanol addition to gasoline can increase its vapour pressure from 62 to 68.9 kPa depending on the ratio of the two components as well as on the amount of ethanol in the mixture (Hammel-Smith et al., 2002 ;  Ulrich, 1999). As shown by Pumphrey et al. (2000), gasoline vapour pressure was initially increased by the addition of different alcohols, but it decreased when using higher alcohol proportions. For gasoline containing 20 to 25% ethanol v/v the observed increase in vapour pressure was around 7%. The maximum increase is observed for the 10% v/v mixture, therefore not relevant for Brazilian mixtures, which is substantiated by our results.

In experiments with natural soil, loss of contaminants by volatilisation seems to happen very rapidly, taking place mostly during the first hours to the first days after contamination (according to the size of the soil sample), slightly higher from BTEX-contaminated soils. In our experiments, no significant difference (p = 0.125) was observed in BTEX volatilisation in the hours following contamination between systems with and without ethanol showing that a possible increase in vapour pressure was not relevant.

Other studies with sandy soil and ethanol-blended gasoline have shown that volatilisation is responsible for more carbon removal than biodegradation of gasoline compounds in unsaturated soil, while biodegradation seemed to be the main mechanism involved in the disappearance of ethanol (Dakhel et al., 2003). Our results suggest that soil components other than sand may affect BTEX retention and thus further promote their biodegradation.

A higher retention of BTEX in the soil matrix was observed in natural as well as in inert soil for ethanol-amended gasoline. In sterile dried natural soils, where no biodegradation occurred, BTEX were still detectable in soil after 33 days in slightly higher amounts in BTEX–ethanol -contaminated soil. Differences in BTEX amounts between BTEX-contaminated and BTEX–ethanol -contaminated soils were very close to significance (p = 0.051).

The tank experiments with unsaturated inert porous medium showed different behaviours for contaminant infiltration and percolation when standard or ethanol-blended gasoline was introduced. Higher amounts of water in the effluents from amended gasoline percolation through soil indicate that the presence of ethanol leads to a more important displacement of soil residual water. In soils with low water content (around 5% weight) high amounts of introduced LNAPLs would remain as a continuous phase over water and could be easily expelled, while the water phase would be retained on soil particles. Hence, a single phase is observed in effluents, comprising mainly gasoline compounds with small quantities of water. Moreover, as these assays were conducted with inert soil, there was no interference of organic matter and other soil components with the draining processes of gasoline; actually, the lower the amounts of soil organic matter, the less the retention of contaminants by the soil matrix (Haydn et al., 1997). In similar experiments conducted with natural structured soil with water contents around 10%, the percolation of gasoline and of ethanol-blended gasoline through soil always resulted in single-phase effluents (data not shown). This shows the role of soil mineralogy and components, such as clays and organic matter among others, on the distribution and retention of water and contaminants, even for soils with low clay and organic matter contents such as in this study (Halmemies et al., 2003 ;  Haydn et al., 1997).

Lower amounts of BTEX were found in effluents when gasoline was blended to ethanol. Analysis of variance shows a significant difference between benzene and toluene retention in assays with gasoline and those with a gasoline–ethanol mixture (p < 0.05). The effects of ethanol on the solubilisation and movement of BTEX, discussed above, seem to enhance the retention of gasoline compounds. If ethanol tends to remain solubilised while gasoline percolates through the unsaturated zone (McDowell and Powers, 2003), its presence in higher amounts could increase BTEX retention even more, further enhanced by the low water saturation. Because of ethanol's high solubility in water it is probably mostly present in the aqueous phase. Column assays with inert porous medium show that over 80% of introduced ethanol is found in the aqueous phase of the effluent (Siniscalchi, 2006).

As no detectable expulsion of water seems to happen while amended gasoline percolates through natural soil, conditions in this case are more favourable to microbial degrading activities. Furthermore, ethanol probably remains retained in greater amounts in residual water in natural than in inert porous medium, which also stimulates microbial activity (Österreicher-Cunha et al., 2007) and probably biomass increase (da Silva and Alvarez, 2002).

When contaminants enter the soil, the structure of microbial communities shifts, as the strains that are able to survive and eventually use the xenobiotic molecules as carbon and energy source are selected (e.g. Daubaras and Chakraborty, 1992; Edwards, 2002; Thompson et al., 1999 ;  Zucchi et al., 2003). Thus, as the structure of the community changes, extremely specialised microorganisms thrive and spread whereas others, less specialised, either disappear or enter resistant forms, like cysts and spores. These highly adapted strains are less likely to grow under laboratory conditions, explaining the drastic reduction observed in culturable bacterial populations after soil contamination. As biodegradation continues, soil toxicity gradually decreases until eventually attaining levels that allow for less specialised strains to resume growing, while the highly adapted populations in turn fade away (Duarte et al., 2001; Pascual et al., 2000 ;  Zucchi et al., 2003). Results show that the resumption of growth of culturable bacteria took place around the 40th day after contamination, whereas in ethanol-contaminated soils a 30-day delay was seen for this recovery. Hence, monitoring culturable bacteria allows the evaluation of levels of soil toxicity.

While culturable bacteria disappear, non-culturable microorganisms in soil seem to be actively degrading BTEX and ethanol, as degrading activity increased in contaminated soils. Those with ethanol-amended gasoline display much higher and longer-lasting activity, probably because of a preliminary degradation of ethanol followed by that of BTEX. Gasoline compounds have a natural origin and most environmental organisms possess the ability to degrade them (Atlas, 1981; Atlas, 1995; Baker et al., 2000 ;  Miles and Doucette, 2001); however, this process requires the activation or synthesis of specific enzymes, which generally causes a lag time before degradation begins. Ethanol, on the other hand, is constitutively degraded, meaning the enzymes are constantly active and ethanol immediately enters metabolic biochemical cycles (Stryer, 1995).

No lag phase was observed before the onset of increased levels of microbial activity, as seen by Dakhel et al. (2003). The amounts of ethanol blended to gasoline did not seem sufficient to hinder microbial activity, although it inhibited the growth of culturable bacteria. The presence of significant amounts of biodegradable organic molecules in gasoline could have counteracted the toxic effect of ethanol by stimulating other, resistant, populations. Degrading activity remained constant in uncontaminated soils throughout the 33-day assay while contaminated soils showed increased activity, higher in ethanol -containing soils. Thus, a delay of processes in soils contaminated with amended gasoline is also substantiated by measurements of microbial activity, suggesting a preferential degradation of ethanol that slows down BTEX degradation. Statistical testing of activity levels shows a significant difference between responses from standard and from ethanol-blended gasoline as well as between contaminated and uncontaminated soils (p < 0.05). Only sterile soils still had detectable amounts of BTEX 33 days after contamination, substantiating the role of microbial degrading activity in the disappearance of contaminants.

A delayed biodegradation of BTEX when gasoline is blended with ethanol could be caused by a depletion of soil electron acceptors due to the early preferential degradation of ethanol. BTEX would then have to be degraded in anaerobic conditions, which is slower and less effective as observed in saturated soil, in field as well as in laboratory experiments (Heider and Fuchs, 1997 ;  Lovley, 2000). However, this negative effect of ethanol on BTEX biodegradation seems to be easily by-passed by the addition of new or other electron acceptors, like oxygen, by aeration (bioventing or air-sparging), iron or sulphates (da Silva and Alvarez, 2005; Österreicher-Cunha et al., 2004 ;  Österreicher-Cunha et al., 2007). Thus, the benefits of ethanol-amended gasoline regarding the control and reduction of atmospheric pollution are not threatened by problems linked to its biodegradation in soil; simple and accessible measures can be taken to avoid a longer persistence of gasoline–ethanol mixtures in the subsurface. Moreover, the increase of biomass caused by ethanol degradation in the saturated zone seems to lead to a more efficient subsequent degradation of BTEX (da Silva and Alvarez, 2002). However, a better understanding of these processes is still necessary and crucial to the decision-making involved in the remediation approaches to be adopted in cases of soil contamination with ethanol-amended gasoline.
5. Conclusions

This study assessed some of the processes that regulate the biodegradation and distribution of gasoline and ethanol-blended gasoline in unsaturated soil, analysing physical, chemical and microbiological parameters. The analysis of results seems to indicate that the effect of ethanol on the fate of gasoline compounds may actually be of concern: all the parameters monitored suggest a higher retention and a delayed degradation of BTEX in unsaturated porous medium when gasoline is amended with ethanol.

When gasoline was introduced with ethanol, more BTEX were retained in unsaturated inert soil; natural attenuation of gasoline compounds in undisturbed soil took longer, as shown by chemical analysis of residues; microbial degrading activities were much higher and longer lasting in ethanol-containing soils; unspecialised culturable bacteria, unable to grow under high amounts of contaminants, resumed growth much later than in gasoline-contamination situations.

The co-solvency effect of ethanol on BTEX and its high solubility in water seem to cause a higher retention of BTEX in the soil matrix. The presence of gasoline and gasoline–ethanol mixtures in soil enhanced microbial enzymatic activity but suppressed culturable bacterial populations. The results presented here show the possibility of evaluating the impact caused by contamination as well as the reduction of soil toxicity by evaluating culturable bacterial populations. Bacterial counts showed a delay in soil populations’ reaction to contamination in gasoline–ethanol -contaminated soil when compared to gasoline-contaminated ones, which indicates a possible preferential degradation of ethanol. Microbial degrading activity, higher in soils contaminated with BTEX–ethanol, suggests it is a better tool to evaluate biodegradation activities than assessing microbial contingents, which only evaluates shifts in numbers of culturable populations. However, counts of culturable populations may be useful to rapidly assess soil toxicity due to contamination.

Contamination persists longer in unsaturated soil when in the presence of ethanol. Still, additional and more accurate chemical analyses are necessary to better evaluate contaminant residue in soil and measure its persistence up to its effect on microbial populations, especially culturable bacteria.

However, the possibility that ethanol may delay BTEX degradation should not invalidate its use as a fuel and/or gasoline oxygenated additive; its positive effects on atmospheric pollution are undeniable as well as its value as an alternative to fossil fuels. Studies to further verify degradation processes are necessary so as to determine adequate approaches to address spills of gasoline–ethanol mixtures that could bypass eventual negative effects of ethanol.
Acknowledgements

The authors acknowledge Tácio Mauro Pereira de Campos for his contribution to this work; Márcio R. Miranda, Alessandra O.C. Dupont, Amaury C. Fraga and the team of the Environmental Geotechnics Laboratory for assistance with field and experimental work; and the team of the Fuel Laboratory. This study was funded by CNPq, Faperj and PRONEX.
