25A
Bioremediation and monitoring of aromatic-polluted habitats
Vincenza Andreoni & Liliana Gianfreda
Received: 2 January 2007 /Revised: 25 April 2007 /Accepted: 25 April 2007 / Published online: 31 May 2007
# Springer-Verlag 2007
Abstract Bioremediation may restore contaminated soils
through the broad biodegradative capabilities evolved by
microorganisms towards undesirable organic compounds.
Understanding bioremediation and its effectiveness is
rapidly advancing, bringing available molecular approaches
for examining the presence and expression of the key genes
involved in microbial processes. These methods are
continuously improving and require further development
and validation of primer- and probe-based analyses and
expansion of databases for alternative microbial markers.
Phylogenetic marker approaches provide tools to determine
which organisms are present or generally active in a community;
functional gene markers provide only information
concerning the distribution or transcript levels (deoxyribonucleic
acid [DNA]- or messenger ribonucleic acid [mRNA]-
based approaches) of specific gene populations across
environmental gradients. Stable isotope probing methods
offer great potential to identify microorganisms that metabolize
and assimilate specific substrates in environmental
samples, incorporating usually a rare isotope (i.e., 13C) into
their DNA and RNA. DNA and RNA in situ characterization
allows the determination of the species actually involved in
the processes being measured. DNA microarrays may
analyze the expression of thousands of genes in a soil
simultaneously. A global analysis of which genes are being
expressed under various conditions in contaminated soils will
reveal the metabolic status of microorganisms and indicate
environmental modifications accelerating bioremediation.
Keywords PAHs. BTEX . Bioremediation .
Molecular approaches. Monitoring . Soil quality
Introduction
In the recent years, a high number of polluting compounds
has been released into the environment because of several
industrial and/or agricultural activities. In particular, the
rapid industrialization of agriculture, expansions in the
chemical industry, and the need to generate cheap forms of
energy have all resulted in an ever-increasing reliance on
anthropogenic organic chemicals and caused the contamination
of a significant number of soil environments by
xenobiotic compounds (Reid et al. 2000) with negative,
irreversible effects on environmental quality and health.
Over the last decades, there has been an increasing
interest in biological methodologies, collectively indicated
as bioremediation that may help reduce the risk of organic
pollutants in soil and effectively restore polluted sites. These
methodologies, usually considered environment-friendly
treatments, constitute essentially a managed or spontaneous
process mediated by living organisms (mainly microorganisms),
which degrade or transform contaminants to less toxic
or nontoxic products, with mitigation or elimination of
environmental contamination.
To evaluate the status of a contaminated site in terms of
its capability of successfully responding to a bioremediation
approach, to design and implement suitable microbial detoxifying
strategies, and finally to monitor the effectiveness of the
Appl Microbiol Biotechnol (2007) 76:287–308
DOI 10.1007/s00253-007-1018-5
V. Andreoni
Dipartimento di Scienze e Tecnologie Alimentari e Microbiologiche,
Università degli Studi di Milano,
Via Celoria 2,
20133 Milan, Italy
L. Gianfreda (*)
Dipartimento di Scienze del Suolo, della Pianta,
dell’Ambiente e delle Produzioni Animali,
Università di Napoli Federico II,
Via Università 100,
80055 Portici, Napoli, Italy
e-mail: liliana.gianfreda@unina.it
bioremediation approach, not only a detailed understanding of
the main metabolic and genetic features of contaminant
microbial degradation but also the advantages and bottlenecks
of the available monitoring methodologies are needed.
This is a brief survey of some aspects, with particular
reference to soil, concerning (a) the pollution of the
environment by two classes of aromatic pollutants namely,
polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) and volatiles
aromatics collectively indicated as BTEX (benzene, toluene,
ethylbenzene, xylene), (b) the main metabolic pathways
and the genetic bases of their microbial degradation,
(c) the biological strategies to reduce or to eliminate their
contamination, and (d) the more advanced monitoring
techniques to evaluate the effectiveness of a bioremediation
process.
Fate of PAHs and BTEX in soil
Soils and groundwater are preferred sinks for complex
contamination. As possible consequence, various chemical,
biological, and biochemical soil properties have been profoundly
altered, and their main effect has been the continuous
lost of soil functions in sustaining the survival of living
organisms.
PAHs (i.e., naphthalene, phenanthrene, anthracene, etc.)
and BTEX, occurring ubiquitously in the environment as
complex mixtures, are particularly abundant and have been
recognized as an environmental contamination problem of
worldwide magnitude. PAHs, listed by the US Environmental
Protection Agency and the European Community as
priority pollutants (Samanta et al. 2002), are hydrophobic
compounds occurring in soil, sediment, water, air, and
plants as the result of the incomplete combustion of coal,
oil, petrol, and wood or of petrochemical industries. The
majority of these substances are highly persistent within
ecosystems in unaltered, less degradable chemical forms
because of their low water solubility, their intrinsic chemical
stability, and high recalcitrance to degradation. Therefore,
hydrocarbon-polluted sites may represent a long-term source
of pollution and pose a severe risk to environmental health.
BTEX enter the environment primarily through processes
associated with gasoline and petroleum fuels,
leakage of underground petroleum storage thanks, and
spills at petroleum wells but also from industrial effluents,
wood processing, and manufacturing of pesticides, detergents,
chemicals, paints, and varnishes. They are highly
soluble and volatile toxic substances, thus forming one of
the main groundwater and health-risk contaminant groups.
The fate and behavior of PAHs and BTEX in soil is
governed by several different factors linked to soil properties,
compound characteristics, and environmental factors
(Fig. 1).
In general, when an organic chemical enters the soil, it
can be subjected to two basic processes (Fig. 1a): (1)
transfer processes that relocate the substances without
altering their structure and (2) degradation processes that
alter their chemical structures, by the splitting in different
products.
In all the processes depicted in Fig. 1a, a main role is
played by the interactions occurring at interfaces between
organic and inorganic soil colloids and chemicals through
sorption/desorption mechanisms (Stotzky 1986). These
interactions may strongly affect the movement of chemicals,
their availability for plant or microbial uptake, and
their transformation by abiotic or biotic agents.
Moreover, the concentration of an organic contaminant
in the liquid phase, regulating consequently its accessibility
to target organisms, is mainly governed by adsorption whose
extent depends on both the properties of the adsorbent matrix
and of the compound.
If the organic pollutant is highly hydrophobic, i.e., with a
very low solubility in water, the most important process
affecting the rate of all above mentioned processes in soil is
its partitioning between soil components: air, soil solution,
and soil matrix. In particular, the higher is the hydrophobicity
of the compound, the greater is its persistence in the
environment, with deleterious, often irreversible effects on
environmental health.
The persistence of an organic contaminant is, however,
not only due to its intrinsic molecular property, but it is
much more a result of environmental microhabitats that
affect both the mass transfer of the xenobiotic to microorganism
and its degradative activity (Huesemann et al.
2004).
The PAH bioavailability is further complicated when
PAHs interact with nonaqueous phase liquids (NAPL) and
soil colloids, thus resulting less or completely unavailable
for microorganisms (Efroymson and Alexander 1995,
Birman and Alexander 1996).
An important process affecting the concentration of an
organic compound in soil and consequently its availability
is the “aging,” (Fig. 1b) during which the organic
contaminant can form stronger bonds with the soil or can
be incorporated or sequestered in structural micropores of
mineral lattices or in hydrophobic remote areas of the soil
organic matrix (Alexander 2000; Gevao et al. 2000). This
can occur at a so greater extent that desorption becomes
very slow, thus limiting the flux of the contaminant to the
aqueous phase, and the contaminant becomes not readily
bioavailable. The combination of the above phenomena
leads to a different distribution and partitioning of the
contaminants in soil (Weissenfels et al. 1992), rendering
them less readily bioavailable, resistant to biodegradation,
and thus more persistent in the soil (Barraclough et al.
2005).
288 Appl Microbiol Biotechnol (2007) 76:287–308
Similarly to other volatile organic compounds, BTEX
can adsorb into soil organic matter and on soil mineral
surfaces. Their behavior in soil as well as their removal by
bioremediation approaches has been illustrated by several
authors, resorting often the use of model systems and
claiming the importance of diffusion mechanisms in the
heterogeneous soil matrix (Stapleton et al. 1998; Margesin
et al. 2003a; Scullion 2006). Soil has been often
considered a biphorous sorbent model, and the contribution
of soil organic matter has been negligible to describe the
adsorption kinetics of toluene (Arocha et al. 1996).
Microbial degradation of PAHs and BTEX
PAHs and BTEX are biodegradable under both aerobic (Gibson
and Parales 2000; Habe and Omori 2003) and anaerobic
conditions (Gibson and Harwood 2002; Chakraborty and
Coates 2004).
Under aerobic conditions, bacteria and fungi utilize oxygen
for both ring activation and cleavage of the aromatic nucleus
and as the electron acceptor for its complete degradation.
The biodegradation of PAHs can serve as carbon and
energy sources for the degrading organisms (assimilative
Fig. 1 Main processes (a) and
aging (b) affecting the fate of an
organic chemical in soil. OC
Organic chemical, M
microorganisms
Appl Microbiol Biotechnol (2007) 76:287–308 289
biodegradation) or for intracellular detoxification. The
intracellular hydroxylation of PAHs in bacteria is an initial
step in preparing ring fission and assimilation, whereas in
fungi, it is an initial step in detoxification (Cerniglia 1993).
PAHs with low molecular weights are more rapidly
degraded than less soluble and higher molecular weights
compounds. Indeed, only a very limited number of bacteria
can grow in pure cultures on PAHs with five or more
aromatic rings. Environmental bacterial isolates often
degrade only a narrow range of PAHs, and the patterns of
the simultaneous degradation of PAH mixtures are complex.
Often, they are cooperative processes that involve a
consortium of strains with complementary capacities
(Bouchez et al. 1995).
PAH bacterial metabolism usually occurs via the initial
incorporation of molecular oxygen by an initial dioxygenase
three-component enzymatic system (Habe and Omori
2003) and forming a cis-dihydrodiol. Figure 2 summarizes
the initial attack of low molecular PAHs. Naphthalene,
phenanthrene, anthracene, and pyrene are biodegraded
through similar steps (Fig. 2a). The initial oxygenolytic
attack produces for all the PAHs the dihydroxylated
derivatives. Afterwards, these latter are further metabolized
to few intermediates, including catechol and gentisic and
protocathecuic acids (Fig. 2), which are channelled into the
tricarboxylic acid cycle intermediates by their dioxygenasemediated
ring cleavage in either meta or para position.
The initial oxidative attack of BTEX consists of direct
oxidation of the aromatic ring via a mono-oxygenase (Khan
et al. 2001), a dioxygenase attack, or oxidation of the alkyl
side chain, catalyzed by mono-oxygenase, through the
typical toluene mono-oxygenase, toluene dioxygenase, MONOXYGENASE
CH3
OH
OH
COOH
COOH
OH
COOH
OH
HO OH
todC1
phnAC
phdAC
bphA1
bedC1
OH
CH3
CRO
OH
COOH
CH3
CH3
CH3
(Py) (Ph) (N) (A)
(GA) (C)/(C-like int.)
(B) (T)
DIOXYGENASE DIOXYGENASE
(T)
(X)
Ring fission
C23O
UPPER PATHWAY
LOWER PATHWAY
xylE1
todE
tbmE
xylAM (XYL)
a
UPPER PATHWAY
b
(PCA)
(SA)
(TOD)
phnAc
phnAc
bphA1
nidA
nahAC, nidA
narA1, nodA1
nagAC
tbmA
tbuA
(TOM)
Fig. 2 Schematic presentation of initial microbial attack and ring
cleavage and genes involved in the respective reactions for PAHs (a)
and for BTEX (b). a, Naphthalene (N) is initially oxygenated by a
naphthalene dioxygenase to yield 1,2-dihydroxynaphthalene, which is
further degraded to salicylate (SA). SA is then metabolized via
catechol (C) or gentisic acid (GA). Phenanthrene (Ph) is mostly
oxygenated by a phenanthrene dioxygenase to yield 3,4-dihydroxyphenanthrene,
which is further metabolized through two pathways:
one follows the N biodegradation pathway with the formation of SA,
and the other leads to protochatechuic acid (PCA). Anthracene (A) is
dioxygenated at the 1,2 position to yield 1,2-dihydroxyanthracene,
which is later metabolized to SA and C. Pyrene (Py) is mostly
dioxygenated at the 1,2 position. A successive derivative, 4-
phenanthroic acid, undergoes a second dioxygenase reaction and
further metabolized via catabolic pathways similar to those of Ph (for
detailed reactions, see Habe and Omori 2003). b, Toluene (T) and
xylenes (X) are degraded via different routes to catechol-like
intermediates (C-like int), catechol (C), and protocatechuic acid
(PCA); benzene (B) is degraded to catechol (C) (adapted from Williams
and Sayers 1994; Habe and Omori 2003)
290 Appl Microbiol Biotechnol (2007) 76:287–308
and toluene pathways (Fig. 2b; Williams and Sayers
1994; Gibson and Parales 2000). All these pathways
converge in the formation of (substituted) catechol intermediates
(Reineke 1998), which are cleaved by ortho- or,
as in the majority of the already described pathways, by
meta-cleavage dioxygenases.
The biodegradability of PAHs and BTEX in the absence
of oxygen by a diversity of organisms (Gibson and
Harwood 2002; Chakraborty and Coates 2004) makes
possible beneficial remediation under anaerobic conditions.
Anaerobic zones frequently develop in soils during
compaction, as well as in soils and sediments contaminated
with hydrocarbons, where the indigenous aerobic microbial
population is stimulated and a rapid depletion of the
dissolved oxygen content of the groundwater may occur
(Lovley 1997). Water entering the contaminated environment
carries only small amount of dissolved oxygen
because of its low solubility, and O2 replenishment from
the atmosphere is slow.
The microbial utilization of aromatic compounds in the
absence of oxygen occurs without the perturbation of the
benzene nucleus. Anaerobic degradation of naphthalene
and, in some instances, of phenanthrene has been measured
in microbial communities in soil and sediments under
condition of denitrification (Al-Bashir et al. 1990) or
sulphate reduction (Zhang et al. 2000; Meckenstock et al.
2000). With the identification of a sequence of metabolites
during naphthalene and phenanthrene degradation by
consortia, a pathway for these PAHs has been depicted
(Fig. 3). As confirmed with a pure culture of a sulphatereducing
bacterium, strain NaphS2 (Galushko et al. 1999),
phenanthrene is carboxylated by the addition of an external
bicarbonate molecule to yield phenanthrene carboxylic acid
(Annweiler et al. 2002).
CH3
S- CoA
CH2
O
CO2
COOH
COOH
CO2 CO2
COOH
-OOC-CH-CH-COO-
-OOC-HC-CH2-COOHS-CoA
HS-CoA
COOH
Benzylsuccinate synthase
(T)
(BS) (BA)
(B)
(B-CoA)
carboxylase
Ring fission and mineralization
(D-2-CA)
(2-NA)
ring reduction
(N)
carboxylase
(PhCA)
ring reduction
(Ph)
carboxylase
H2O
2[H] 2[H]
Fig. 3 Schematic presentation
for the anaerobic degradation of
toluene (T), benzene (B), naphthalene
(N), and phenanthrene
(Ph). Initial reaction involved:
For T, addition of fumarate at
the methyl group of toluene to
form benzylsuccinate (BS). After
activation with CoA, BS is
oxidized through the formation
of phenylitaconate to benzoyl
CoA (B-CoA) as a central intermediate
(for detailed reactions
from BS to B-CoA, see
Spormann and Widdel 2000);
for B, addition of CO2 to
benzoic acid (BA) and subsequent
transformation to B-CoA;
for N, addition of CO2 to yield
2-naphtoic acid (2-NA), which
is further degraded by sequential
reduction steps to decalin-2-carboxylic
acid (D-2-CA); Ph is
also directly carboxylated to
phenanthrene carboxylic acid
(PhCA) as the initial step
towards mineralization (adapted
from Young and Phelps 2005;
Chakraborty and Coates 2004)
Appl Microbiol Biotechnol (2007) 76:287–308 291
Among BTEX, the anaerobic biodegradation of toluene
has been the most investigated. It can be degraded under
many reducing conditions (Andersen et al. 1995; Coates et
al. 1996). The first step in the anaerobic metabolism of
toluene and xylene, as well as of m- and p-cresol and
methylnaphthalene, is mediated by an unusual enzymatic
reaction that is the addition of fumarate to their methyl
group to form benzylsuccinate (Fig. 3) through a benzylsuccinate
synthase (BBS) and not involving a net redox
reaction. Benzylsuccinate has been identified in strains of
Thauera and Azoarcus, in sulphate-reducing strains, and in
methanogenic sediments (Krieger et al. 1999; Elshahed et
al. 2001).
Anaerobic benzene degradation can include initial carboxylation
(Fig. 3), hydroxylation, methylation, or reduction of
the aromatic ring to form benzoyl-CoA (Chakraborty and
Coates 2004). It is noteworthy that benzoyl-CoA for benzene,
benzylsuccinate, and e-phenylitaconate for toluene, methylbenzylsuccinate
for dimethylbenzene and xylene, are the
unique extracellular intermediates identified during the anaerobic
degradation of BTEX (Young and Phelps 2005).
The two intermediates of the naphthalene pathway, 2-
naphthoic acid and decalin-2-carboxylic acid, can serve to
assess an actual naphthalene degradation occurring in field
sites. Similarly, benzylsuccinate-like metabolites, which are
not anthropogenic compounds, can be used as indicators of
the presence in the environment of an active microbial
population utilizing BTEX. Detailed studies performed with
Seal Beach groundwater in California confirmed that the
concentration of such biomarkers decreased over time with
a decrease in the concentration of BTEX (Beller et al.
1995).
Genetic bases of PAH and BTEX microbial
degradation activity
The design of molecular tools for the detection of PAH and
BTEX degradation actually occurring at a contaminated site
requires to have clear insights into the genetic bases of their
microbial degradation activity.
A broad range of oxygenases, differing in structure,
mechanism, and cofactor requirement, are distributed
among the microorganisms that grow on PAHs and BTEX.
Aromatic-ring-hydroxylating dioxygenases generally consist
of a terminal dioxygenase (an iron sulfur protein) and a
reductase chain, which transfers electrons from NAD(P)H
to the terminal dioxygenase. The reduced terminal dioxygenase
catalyzes the direct insertion of molecular oxygen
into the substrate to form cis-arene diols. Some terminal
dioxygenases are homomultimers, whereas others are
heteromultimers consisting of a large subunit (α) and a
small subunit (β) (Furukawa et al. 1993). For example,
naphthalene 1,2-dioxygenase catalyzes the reaction:
Naphthalene þ NAD Pð ÞH þ Hþ þ O2
! þð Þ cis  ð Þ 1R; 2S dihydroxy  1; 2
 dihydronaphhtalene þ NAD Pð Þþ
The large subunits with the same reported substrate
specificity are in general closely related, and their deoxyribonucleic
acid (DNA) sequences are conserved. Current
knowledge on the α-subunits of the terminal oxygenases
indicates two major lineages of importance for PAH
degradation. Phylogenetic studies of amino acid sequences
of the proteins, involved in the initial oxidative attack of
PAHs and BTEX and in their ring cleavage, show
significant sequence homology, indicating a common
ancestry that allowed the design of group-specific primer
sets for detection by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) (Eltis
and Bolin 1996; Meyer et al. 1999; Baldwin et al. 2003).
Among the Gram-negative PAH-degrading bacteria,
several groups of genes for the initial naphthalene oxygenation,
which are often borne on quite large and selftransmissible
NAH plasmids, are known: ndo gene from P.
putida NCIB9816, nah genes from P. putida G7 and NCIB
9816-4, dox genes derived from Pseudomonas sp. C18, and
pah genes cloned from P. putida OUS82 and P. aeruginosa
PaK1. Each gene name is referred to the substrate used by the
strains: nah for naphthalene degradation, ndo for naphthalene
dioxygenation (equivalent to nah), dox for dibenzothiophene
oxidation, and pah for phenanthrene degradation. These
genes are grouped as the “classical nah-like genes” for their
gene organization and sequence similarity (about 90%) to
that of the nah genes of strain G7.
Other phenanthrene and naphthalene upper catabolic
genes are instead evolutionarily different from the nah-like
genes. They have been characterized from both Gramnegative
bacteria other than Pseudomonas species and from
Gram-positive bacteria. They are phd genes from Comamonas
testosteroni strain GZ39, nag genes from Ralstonia sp. U2,
phn genes from Burkholderia sp. RP007, Alcaligenes faecalis
AFK2, and Sphingomonas aromaticovorans 177 and its
related species (Habe and Omori 2003). The phn genes,
although isofunctional to the classical nah-like genes, show
very low homology, being significantly different in sequence
and gene order from the previously characterized genes for
PAH degradation. Strain RP007 utilizes both phenanthrene
and naphthalene (Laurie and Lloyd-Jones 1998); strain AFK2
utilizes phenanthrene but not naphthalene (Kiyohara et al.
1982); differently, Sphingomonas F199 can grow on various
monocyclic aromatic hydrocarbons and PAHs, on biphenyl
292 Appl Microbiol Biotechnol (2007) 76:287–308
and dibenzothiophene (Fredrickson et al. 1999). Dioxygenases
involved in PAH degradation by Gram-positive bacteria are
distantly related to PAH dioxygenases of Gram-negative
strains. Nar genes and phd genes have been identified in
Rhodococcus sp. strain NCIMB12038 (Larkin et al. 1999) and
in Nocardioides sp. KP7 (Saito et al. 1999), respectively.
Similar dioxygenase system (nid) genes which encode a novel
polycyclic aromatic-ring dioxygenase have been reported
from Mycobacterium sp. PYR-1 and Mycobacterium sp.
6PY (Khan et al. 2001). In particular, PYR-1 can mineralize
pyrene, 1-nitropyrene, phenanthrene, anthracene, fluoranthene,
and benzo(α)pyrene and has either mono- or dioxygenases to
catalyze the initial attack of PAHs.
A second type of aromatic dioxygenases is composed of
biphenyl and monoaromatic dioxygenases. The toluene/
biphenyl family includes enzymes for the degradation of
toluene (tod genes), benzene (bed genes), isopropylbenzene
(ipb genes), chlorobenzene (tcb genes) and biphenyl (bph
genes) from both Gram-negative and Gram-positive bacteria
(Gibson and Parales 2000; Baldwin et al. 2003). The
dioxygenases for toluene, benzene, and chlorobenzene
degradation are closely related to each other and can be
used to deduce toluene-dioxygenase-specific primers (TOD
primers).
By aligning the nucleotide sequences of the large
subunits of toluene monooxygenase genes, the existence
of two types of monooxygenases, differing in their mode of
attack, have been found. They are divided into families on
the basis of substrate specificity: two families of aromatic
hydrocarbon monooxygenases (tmo genes in Pseudomonas
mendocina KR1 and tbm genes in Pseudomonas sp. strain
JS150) and one family of phenol hydroxylase (phh genes in
Pseudomonas putida P35X and dmp genes in P. putida
CF600) and the alkyl-group-hydroxylating monooxygenases,
(xyl genes in P. putida mt-2). The tbm operon from strain
JS150 has a strong sequence identity to the phenol hydroxylase
encoded by the dmp and phh genes. On the basis of the
apparent phylogeny of these monooxygenases, four primer
sets have been identified by Baldwin et al. 2003 to detect
these genes.
Finally, the catechol 2,3-dioxygenase genes comprise a
diverse family of genes (Eltis and Bolin 1996) that codes
for a group of enzymes with aromatic ring fission activity
toward a wide range of aromatic pollutants. The gene
phylogeny of these very closely related sequences does not
follow strictly a taxonomical relation with the bacterial hosts
because these genes are mainly found on plasmids and their
evolution and conservation rates are heavily affected by traits
like selection pressures, horizontal transfer, and mobile
genetic elements (Williams et al. 2002).
Collectively, these features make the α-subunits of the
iron sulfur protein, components of dioxygenases, amenable
to retrieval by PCR and allow for the identification of
retrieved fragments in the context of existing databases.
In recent years, substantial progress has been made in
understanding the catabolic gene associated with the first
step of anaerobic metabolism of toluene and xylene
degradation in Thauera aromatica and Azoarcus strains.
The target gene, bssA, codes for the α-subunit of BBS,
which is distributed across a wide range of phylogenetically
and physiologically diverse bacteria (Leuthner et al. 1998).
Microbial diversity of polluted and unpolluted
environments
Organic pollution has been reported to reduce diversity in
microbial communities in a variety of environments (Juck
et al. 2000; Roling et al. 2002). In many cases, enrichment
of specific microbial population also occurs. In unpolluted
ecosystems, hydrocarbon-degrading organisms usually represent
less than 0.1% of the cultivable heterotrophic
microbial communities, whereas in contaminated environments,
they constitute up to 100% of the viable microbial
population. Studies on pristine soils and soils with a known
history of PAH contamination revealed that pristine soils
did not yield PAH degraders, whereas contaminated soils
harbored closely related PAH-degrading bacteria to at least
1.5 × 107 cells (g dry wt.)−1
, several orders of magnitude
more than in comparable noncontaminated sites (Mueller
et al. 1994). Mycobacterium spp., Sphingomonas spp.,
Rhodococcus spp., Arthrobacter spp., and Nocardia spp.
populations have been often found to be selectively
stimulated in soil contaminated by PAHs (Kanaly et al.
2000; Daane et al. 2001).
Catabolic genotypes involved in the microbial degradation
pathways of representative fractions of petroleum
hydrocarbons, including n-alkanes, aromatics, and PAHs,
are widespread in Arctic soils (Whyte et al. 1999) and
Alaskan sediments (Sotsky et al. 1994). For example,
Rhodococcus spp. were found to be the most abundant
alkane-degrading genotypes in pristine and contaminated
Arctic and Antarctic soils, while Pseudomonas spp. were
enriched after contamination events, and Acinetobacter spp.
were never found to be predominant members of polar
alkane-degrading communities (Whyte et al. 2002).
Similar trends were observed by Margesin et al. 2003b)
in both contaminated and pristine Alpine soils from Tyrol
(Austria). They determined the genotypes involved in the
degradation of n-alkanes and PAHs by PCR hybridization
analyses of total soil community DNA, using oligonucleotide
primers and DNA probes specific for each genotype.
A significantly higher percentage of genotypes containing
genes from Gram-negative bacteria (P. putida AlkB, xyl E,
Appl Microbiol Biotechnol (2007) 76:287–308 293
and ndoB and Acinetobacter AlkM; 50–75%) than in the
pristine (0–12.5%) soils indicated that these organisms were
enriched after contamination. Moreover, genotypes containing
genes from Gram-positive bacteria (Rhodococccus
AlkB1 and AlkB2 and Mycobacterium nidA) were detected
at high frequency in both contaminated (41.7–75%) and
pristine (37.5–50%) soils, indicating that they were already
present before a contamination event.
Actinobacteria (including mainly Rhodococcus and
Arthrobacter strains) and Proteobacteria, including mainly
γ-Proteobacteria, and more specifically Pseudomonas,
were found to be the resident cultivable BTEX degraders
both in BTEX polluted soils (Stapleton and Sayler 2000;
Hendrickx et al. 2006) and aquifers (Cavalca et al. 2004).
The proliferation of BTEX-degrading Proteobacteria therefore
seems to be a major characteristic of adaptation in
BTEX-contaminated sites. A proliferation of minor phylotypes
within a fuel-contaminated aquifer upon toluene
exposure was observed by Shi et al. 1999, when comparing
the biodiversity of BTEX-polluted and BTEX-unpolluted
aquifers.
The prevalence of certain genotypes in pristine or
contaminated soils may be explained by the r–K scheme,
which assumes that evolution favors either adaptation to
high rates of reproduction (r strategists) or utilization of
environmental resources (K strategists). P. putida and
Acinetobacter, which rapidly colonize and grow on hydrocarbon
contaminants, are r strategists; Rhodococccus and
Mycobacterium, which tend to be more successful in
nutrient limited situations, are K strategists. Population of
K strategists is usually more stable and permanent members
of the community (Atlas and Bartha 1998).
It has been rarely shown whether organic pollution
causes communities to diverge from each other. MassolDeya
et al. 1997 reported that groundwater microbial
communities treated with aromatic hydrocarbons converged
in a fixed-film bioreactor where the environmental
parameters were kept constant. In contrast, Bundy et al.
2002 noted that three soil communities amended with
diesel were distinct from the controls and from each other,
while Roling et al. 2002 observed large changes in the
community structure in a simulated beach oil spill but also
a low similarity between replicates and controls. In a study
performed to analyze the direct and indirect effects of
benzene pollution on microbial community diversity and
structure, Fahy et al. 2005, by combining nucleic acidbased
community profiling with multivariate statistical
analysis, found that the environmental changes caused by
benzene metabolism greatly affected the structure of
microbial communities rather than the toxic and stressful
effects of benzene that only moderately influenced it.
In situ strategies to remediate polluted environments
Remediation techniques, whichever physical, chemical, or
biological treatments suitable for partial or total restoration
of a polluted system (Bouwer and Zehnder 1993; Cerniglia
1993; Adriano et al. 1999; Gevao et al. 2000; Gianfreda
and Nannipieri 2001; Iwamoto and Nasu 2001), may be
utilized in situ, i.e., in the contaminated place itself,
offering numerous advantages over ex situ technologies.
A complete remediation program usually requires more
than one step, including: (a) knowledge of the past history of
the polluted area and activities leading to the contamination
of the site, (b) examination and quantification of the severity
of the contamination problem, (c) development of the
remediation action program to target the specific contaminant
or group of contaminants, (d) development of treatments
and a treatment sequence suited for the wastes and the
site, and (e) an effective monitoring program to evaluate the
effectiveness of the adopted bioremediation plan.
Bioremediation, either as an intrinsic degradation or as
an engineered process, usually refers to the use of microorganisms
(mainly) but also of plants, enzymes, and plant–
microorganisms associations that transform pollutants into
innocuous products (Dec and Bollag 1994; Siciliano and
Germida 1998; Pointing 2001; Gianfreda and Bollag 2002;
Torres et al. 2003).
As claimed by Adriano et al. 1999, the purpose of soil
bioremediation is “not only to enhance the timely degradation,
transformation, remediation or detoxification of
pollutants by biological means, but also to protect soil
quality.” Soil quality has been defined by Doran and Parkin
1994 as the capacity of a soil to function within ecosystem
boundaries to (1) sustain biological productivity, (2)
maintain environmental quality, and (3) promote plant and
animal health.
Intrinsic or natural attenuation
Natural attenuation of contaminated sites is getting more
and more interesting because it seems to enable bioremediation
with a minimized cost, avoiding land disruption and
human exposure.
Biodegradation, chemical transformation, stabilization
(i.e., binding and sequestration by clays and humus),
volatilization, dispersion, dissolution, and dilution are all
natural attenuation processes of organic contaminants in soil
and groundwater. However, such natural processes can be
very slow, and consequently, certain chemicals may persist for
years. For instance, their susceptibility to biodegradation may
change drastically, depending on several factors related to the
294 Appl Microbiol Biotechnol (2007) 76:287–308
chemical and physical properties of both the chemical and the
environment in which they are present.
Methods to assess microbial natural attenuation of BTEX
and PAHs include analysis of the subsurface geology and
hydrology of the site, qualitative and quantitative pollutant
biochemical profiles, pollutant bioavailability, composition
and activity of the microflora, and microcosm studies. An
appropriate evaluation of natural attenuation, however,
requires the demonstration that the transformation processes
are taking place at a rate that is protective of human health
and environment.
Intrinsic contaminant biodegradability, contaminant concentration,
environmental pH and temperature, and availability
of electron acceptors are the main factors that affect
the biochemistry of pollutant degradation.
Appropriate redox conditions determine which redox
regime occurs and, in turn, which kind of substance is
degraded and the rate of biodegradation. Although the rate
of aerobic biodegradation is higher than that of the
anaerobic one, anaerobic processes may be more dominant
when the rate of microbial respiration exceeds the rate of
oxygen input. At a low dissolved oxygen amount, degradation
may even occur by a definite sequence of oxy-anions
as alternate electron acceptors (aerobic → denitrification →
Mn(IV), Fe(III) reduction → sulphate reduction → methanogenesis;
Bouwer and Zehnder 1993) used by microbial
species, active in a given condition.
In the soil, microorganisms may develop various mechanisms
to access sorbed compounds after sorption and aging
processes on soil particles and sediments as well as to utilize
water-insoluble pollutants. Indeed, microorganisms may wait
for a new equilibrium state, create concentration gradients,
bring about microenvironmental pH shifts, produce surfactants,
solvents, and chelators, secrete extracellular enzymes,
and degrade exposed substituents. In addition, they may
produce emulsifiers and surfactants that usually facilitate the
partitioning of the chemical from the NAPL to the water phase
(Chung and Alexander 2002; Gevao et al. 2000).
Biostimulation and bioaugmentation
The absence of natural biodegradation in a contaminated
site may indicate that both localized environmental
conditions and physical and biological constraints may
limit partially or totally the degradation of pollutants and
negatively affect the bioactivity of the process. Bioremediation
technologies usually help natural biodegradation
processes work faster, or they may provide additional,
exogenous biological agents to polluted systems and
improve the transformation processes.
Several strategies may be adopted to efficiently improve
the process and overcome the above constraints: bioaugmentation,
i.e., the addition of strains with desired
degradative capacities, and biostimulation, i.e., the addition
of supplementing carbon sources or other nutrients to
stimulate the activity of indigenous or inoculated degrading
strains.
The utility of bioaugmentation is supported by studies
showing the incapacity of indigenous microorganisms in
some cases and the apparent enhanced bioremediation rate
after the addition of competent microorganisms (Edgehill
1999).
The use of pure cultures into multi-substrate-polluted
systems, such as soil or groundwater, has had variable
results (Bouchez et al. 2000). However, bioaugmentation
using strains enriched from sites containing the target
contaminant, where the population has acquired the
catabolic ability, has had success (Schwartz et al. 2000).
Despite bioaugmentation is still a source of controversy
within environmental microbiology, it is considered as a
way of enlarging the genetic capacity present in a given
site, thus corresponding to an increase in the gene pool and
in the genetic diversity of that site (Dejonghe et al. 2001).
In this contest, the long-term survival of the introduced
donor strain does not represent the major bottleneck in
bioaugmentation processes.
Recently, Thomson et al. 2005 pointed out technical
advances to perform a strain selection based on an in situ
understanding of organism abundance, functional activity,
and population dynamics in the habitat from which they are
derived. It seems logical that a strain, derived from a
population, temporally and spatially prevalent in a specific
habitat, more likely persists as an inoculum when reintroduced,
than one that is transient or alien to such a habitat.
Once an abundant population has been identified, the
second phase of the selection procedure is to identify
strains that are capable of degrading the contaminant(s).
Investigations of microbial populations and their activities
have increasingly necessitated the development and
use of culture-independent methods, such as those involving
PCR-amplified ribosomal ribonucleic acid (rRNA)
genes. With rapid molecular procedures, such as denaturing
or temperature gradient gel electrophoresis (DGGE or
TGGE; Muyzer et al. 1993), terminal restriction fragment
length polymorphism (Liu et al. 1997), and lengthheterogeneity
PCR (Suzuki et al. 1998), together with other
complementary techniques, such as fluorescence in situ
hybridization (FISH; Yang and Zeyer 2003) and stable
isotopic probing (SIP; Jeon et al. 2003), it may be possible
to obtain a more comprehensive assessment of the
composition and structure of bacterial communities and
Appl Microbiol Biotechnol (2007) 76:287–308 295
the responses of the bacteria to different soil conditions and
to determine exactly which organisms assimilate specific
contaminants.
Determination of the potential success of bioaugmentation,
however, requires an understanding of the bioavailability
of the pollutant, the survival and activity of the
added microorganism/s or its genetic material, and the
general environmental conditions that control soil bioremediation
rates. With available genetic techniques, the
comprehension of the fate of added microorganisms and
of the critical parameters for the design of bioaugmentation
processes can be achieved.
For instance, Pseudomonas stutzeri KC was selected
for site inoculation because of its ability to mineralize
carbon tetrachloride under anoxic conditions (Dybas et al.
1998). By manipulating the pH in the field to pH 8, which
lowered iron availability, the strain persisted and actively
degraded the contaminant, by out-competing indigenous
populations that were unable to obtain adequate concentrations
of iron.
To overcome chemical and environmental constraints,
delivery systems may be designed to provide nutrients
(nitrogen and phosphorous), oxygen, and other electron
acceptors to stimulate and maintain the activity of microbial
degraders. Similarly, environmental conditions can be
improved to get optimal values of pH, moisture, etc. for
the microbial degradation of the organic pollutant. Substances
more amenable to biodegradation than the target
contaminant can be added to the soil to stimulate the
microbial cometabolic transformation of the pollutants,
otherwise not degraded. The addition of nutrients can lead
to an increased development of indigenous microorganisms,
which themselves either biostimulate the process or
hinder the process by consuming the added nutrient or
carbon source. In cases where cometabolism is desired, the
consumption of added substrates by indigenous microorganisms,
incapable of cometabolizing the pollutant, can
hinder the growth of the added microorganisms (Bewley
1996; Adriano et al. 1999, Boopathy 2000; Gianfreda and
Nannipieri 2001; Margesin et al. 2003a,b; Scullion 2006).
Monitoring in situ bioremediation
When the bioremediation process is designed and implemented,
its effectiveness has to be demonstrated by a
continuous monitoring through chemical, biological, microbial,
and environmental indicators.
Some general criteria and tools to verify them can be
also adopted (Table 1). They should establish whether the
cleanup of the site has been effectively achieved and the
pollution completely removed. As a result, the evaluation of
the effective removal and disappearance of the pollutant
is the most mandatory. After the treatment, an improvement
of the polluted area in terms of both visual and sensory
aspects as well as the absence of any eco-toxicological risk
should be also assessed.
The assessment of environmental hazards of remediated
sites is mostly established on chemical analyses, based on
the determination of either fine (i.e., pollutant consumption,
intermediates/final products) or lumped (i.e., biochemical
oxygen demand, chemical oxygen demand, total organic
carbon) parameters.
Different approaches for monitoring bioremediation of
contaminated soils/aquifers and evaluating the efficiency of
bioremediation in lowering long-term environmental toxicity
have been proposed. They include measurements of
distinctive metabolites or stable carbon isotope ratios of
dissolved inorganic carbon or residual contaminants.
Another approach is to show that the indigenous microbial
communities are capable of degrading the contaminants
and, ideally, that these bacteria are enriched in contaminated
zones. Nucleic-acid-based techniques are preferred
for such monitoring because they preclude isolation and
cultivation of bacteria. Preferably, molecular techniques
focus on catabolic genes that code for specific pollutantdegrading
enzymes.
Table 1 Criteria and tools for bioremediation process efficacy evaluation
Aspects to be
considered
Criteria to meet Available tools
Chemical and
engineering aspects
Were the target cleanup goals achieved? Chemical and analytical determinations
Could mass balances and predictive models be established?
Biological nature of
the process
Was the biological nature of the process demonstrated? Microorganism presence, variation of microbial
What were the relative contributions of abiotic processes? structure and communities
Eco-toxicological
aspects
Was the pollution completely detoxified? Did the treatment pose
a human or ecological risk?
Toxicity assays (genotoxicity and general toxicity)
Aesthetic aspects Does the treatment result in visual or sensory improvement of
the polluted site?
Social and general response
296 Appl Microbiol Biotechnol (2007) 76:287–308
In the following, the main aspects of some of these
methodologies, their drawbacks, and advantages will be
addressed.
Chemical and biological monitoring
The primary goal in managing contaminated sites is to
render the site environmentally acceptable through management
or remediation so the site can be used for some
acceptable purposes. This requires to select some soil
cleanup criteria and these latter must be adopted under a
risk-based approach. Answering “how clean is clean” in a
meaningful way requires making a determination of what
concentration of a chemical is environmentally acceptable
at a specific site, i.e., to determine what constitutes an
environmental acceptable endpoint. An efficient instrumental
procedure should be designed to determine both the total
quantity of pollutants and their compositions before and
after the bioremediation process.
Several chemical methods are available to evaluate the
concentration of a pollutant and its depletion in a contaminated
site. They include gas chromatography (GC), GC/mass
spectrometry (MS), GC/flame ionization detector (FID),
infrared (IR), fluorescence spectroscopy, luminescence techniques,
and others. Each of them may present advantages or
constraints and may be more or less suitable and applicable to
a particular type of soil (low or high organic matter content,
low or high clay content, etc.) or contaminant mixtures. For
example, GC/FID (as also GC/MS) is suitable for the
identification and determination of contaminants and has the
advantage that FID response is linear in a wide range of
concentrations and not influenced by temperature changes.
However, this methodology can have poor sensitivity because
some carbon compounds may be oxidable (Korda et al. 1997).
Similarly, luminescence techniques are very sensitive and
present a reasonable selectivity to detect microbial activity
and the aromatic content of complex mixtures of hydrocarbons.
They, however, have a limited application in
multispecies oil-degrading microbial communities and under
field conditions because of the severe and not quantifiable
quenching of light emission in soil slurries or soil media
(Korda et al. 1997).
Among the analytical methods, fluorescence spectroscopy,
although generally accepted as a powerful and sensitive
analytical tool to determine aromatic pollutants such as
PAHs (Lombardi and Jardim 1999; Nakashima et al. 2000),
has, however, limited applicability because the spectra of
complex mixtures cannot be often resolved adequately
(Lombardi and Jardim 1999).
Gomez et al. 2004 employed a derivative technique such
as synchronous luminescence to classify the pollutants on a
routine basis and isolate the specific compounds from
polluted soil. By applying IR, GC, and synchronous
fluorescence spectroscopy, they successfully determined
many PAHs in contaminated soil.
Usually, an exhaustive chemical extraction of the
remediated soil should be performed to evaluate the
residual concentration of the pollutant. Indeed, the final
concentration of the pollutant has to be lower than that
determined by this method because the contamination
levels established by laws and regulations are frequently
governed by this requirement.
This approach, however, could be misleading. For
instance, the residual soil concentration of PAHs detected
by an exhaustive extraction method after bioremediation
treatment could represent the nonbioavailable fraction.
Because nonbioavailable fractions of pollutants are usually
considered of minor hazard (Alexander 2000), several
methodologies to estimate only the remaining bioavailable
fraction of pollutants have been developed. They include
chemical tests capable of measuring the desorbing fraction,
based on nonexhaustive methodologies and utilizing various
extractants such as solvent mixtures, surfactants,
cyclodextrins, and soil-phase extraction (Sabatè et al.
2006).
In a feasibility study performed on a biostimulated
creosote-contaminated soil, Sabatè et al. 2006 established
a theoretical biodegradation limit based on the desorbing
fraction using a mild extraction technique involving cyclodextrins.
No metabolite accumulation was detected, indicating
that biostimulation conditions permitted ample
metabolic cooperation among the microbial populations
present in the creosote-contaminated soil. No toxic intermediate
products and a negligible formation of bound
residues were also determined.
A wide variety of organic pollutants is degradable by
white-rot fungi through the action of their aspecific
enzymatic systems (Gianfreda and Rao 2004). Therefore,
they can be helpful when dealing with a site contaminated
by a mixture of different xenobiotic pollutants. To monitor
and control the effectiveness of the bioremediation process,
the fungal biomass has usually to be quantified in situ.
Indirect methods capable of estimate fungal biomass have
been developed to overcome the incapability of measuring
directly the amount of fungal biomass. These indirect
techniques include biochemical methods that rely on the
chemical assay of fungus-specific cell components such as
chitin, phospholipids fatty acids, or ergosterol. This latter is
considered a useful indicator for fungal biomass in polluted
soils as well as a tool for monitoring bioremediation
processes, as its content is independent of the presence or
the absence of pollutants (Barajas-Acheve et al. 2002).
A strategy for monitoring in situ biodegradation of a
compound is the method known as SIP that relies on the
changes in stable isotope composition of the molecule of
interest. It plays a role in attributing the assimilation of
Appl Microbiol Biotechnol (2007) 76:287–308 297
specific elements from certain compounds to microorganisms
within complex microbial communities. In practice,
the application of SIP has almost exclusively been restricted
to the use of 13C, and the microbial community should have
a sufficient number of labeled atoms to allow biomarker
separation and detection. The use of this technique presents
two limitations: (1) the separation based on density requires
the substrate to be labeled at close to 100%, and this is
expensive and sometimes unavailable in addition to
requiring long incubation times, and (2) the labeled
substrate is used predominantly for growth to surmount
diluted label issues (Wellington et al. 2003).
Hydrocarbons enter the subsurface with a distinct
isotopic composition or 13C/12C ratio. Microbial processes
make small but significant changes in isotopic compositions
by preferentially utilizing the lighter isotopes
(Richnow et al. 2003) and leaving the residual substrate
fraction enriched of the heavier isotopes.
SIP involves tracking stable isotope atoms from
particular substrates into components of microbial cells,
referred to as biomarkers. The informative biomarkers
used in environmental microbiology are DNA, RNA and
phospholipid fatty acids (PLFAs); each of them has its
strengths and weaknesses (Dumont and Murrell 2005;
Manefield et al. 2002).
Because SIP is founded on assimilatory processes, its
utility is restricted to chemical transformations that microorganisms
perform, at least in part, for anabolic purposes.
Nonassimilatory processes (co-oxidation) fall outside the
applicability of SIP. DNA- and RNA-SIP are usually aimed
at discovering 16 S rRNA gene sequences, hence, taxa.
SIP can be used to describe in situ biodegradation of
pollutants in both qualitative and quantitative terms. In a
field study, BTEX and PAHs of a polluted, anoxic aquifer
exhibited a significant concentration gradient along an
800-m groundwater flow path downstream of the source
of contamination. Richnow et al. 2003 determined the
concentrations and the isotopic compositions of contaminants
to examine in situ biodegradation at the test site by
applying laboratory-derived fractionation factors and the
relative Rayleigh equation for closed systems (Hoefs 1997).
On the basis of isotope values and on the laboratory-derived
isotope fractionation factors for toluene and o-xylene in
the monitoring wells, a significant biodegradation along the
groundwater flow path was found, and in the wells, at the
end of the plume, toluene and o-xylene were almost completely
reduced by in situ microbial degradation.
The most remarkable advantage to use PLFAs as
biomarkers in SIP is the rapidity with which PFLAs
become detectably labeled and the quantitative information
generated from the analysis of PLFAs with isotope ratio
MS. The primary limitation of this approach is that the
phylogenetic resolution offered by this biomarker is inferior
to that offered by nucleic-acid-based biomarkers and that it
requires signature PLFAs to be identified from close
cultivable relatives.
PLFA-SIP has been applied to link the degradation of
toluene to genera within the order of Actinomycetales
(Hanson et al. 1999) and to identify sulphate-reducing, toluene
degrading microorganisms in the sediment of a petroleum
hydrocarbon-contaminated aquifer (Pelz et al. 2001).
Jeon et al. 2003 released 13C-labeled naphthalene in a
contaminated site to trace the flow of pollutant carbon into
the naturally occurring microbial community. They succeeded
in (a) documenting 13CO2 evolution, (b) creating a
library of 16 S rRNA gene clones from 13C-labeled
sediment DNA, (c) identifying a taxonomic cluster (92–95
clones) involved in metabolism of the added naphthalene,
and (d) isolating a previously undescribed bacterium (strain
CJ2) closely related to Polaromonas vacuolata. This latter
hosts the sequence of a dioxygenase gene (nahAc)
responsible for in situ naphthalene biodegradation. Naphthalene
utilization by strain CJ2 was then confirmed in
mineral salts media analyzed by GC/MS.
Because DNA-SIP relies on the isolation of labeled
DNA by density centrifugation, the degree of isotopic
enrichment is crucial. The DNA synthesis in situ, which
reflects organism replication rates, limits the enrichment of
this biomarker and hence the utility of DNA-SIP. By
comparison, RNA synthesis rates are higher than those of
DNA, being a function of copy number and the turnover of
RNA. For this reason, RNA will be labeled more rapidly,
making it a more responsive biomarker with a high degree
of phylogenetic resolution. The potential limitation inherent
to RNA-SIP is the ability to extract high quality RNA from
environmental samples. Advances in nucleic acid extraction
methodologies suggest, however, that this will not impede
the broad application of this technique.
Genetic monitoring
Detection of specific nucleic acid sequences and nucleic
acid hybridization, using specific probes for a biodegradative
gene or gene message, is today an indispensable
approach for the identification of microorganisms in
environmental samples. The detection of phylogenetic and
catabolic genes in environmental samples is based on a set
of different genomic approaches (Fig. 4).
Hybridization- or PCR-based detection systems involve
recognition of a specific nucleic acid fragment or different
electrophoretic patterns (fingerprints) (Sayler and Layton
1990; Steffan and Atlas 1991).
The probes may be employed to determine the overall
genetic diversity, the dominant and active gene pool, and
the density and frequency of specific gene lines required to
degrade a target compound at a site.
298 Appl Microbiol Biotechnol (2007) 76:287–308
On account of the key position of the initial- and ringoxygenases
during aerobic PAH and BTEX degradation, as
well as of BBS for anaerobic toluene/xylene degradation,
the genes encoding these enzymes have been used as
targets to detect the presence of hydrocarbon degraders at
the DNA level and to construct specific gene probes.
Once a probe has been developed, the probe can be
expanded for many uses including quantitative PCR or a
second generation PCR, i.e., real-time PCR, and functional
gene probe arrays. Real-time PCR uses a fluorescent duallabeled
probe-based detection system (TaqMan probe) allowing
PCR amplification and detection within closed tube systems.
The development in the years of several primers has
allowed detecting and quantifying in environmental samples
the presence of specific genotypes encoding the key
steps in PAH and BTEX biodegradation and in their
messenger RNA (mRNA) (Meyer et al. 1999; Ringelberg
et al. 2001; Baldwin et al. 2003; Junca and Pieper 2003;
Hall et al. 2005; Hendrickx et al. 2006).
For example, nid gene sequences encoding for the large
(nidA) and the small (nidB) subunits of the dioxygenase
system have been used to create a gene probe for the
detection of PAH-degrading mycobacteria in soils undergoing
bioremediation (Hall et al. 2005).
Cells DNA mRNA Protein
Soil Sample
Isolation/Cultivation of organism involved
in bioremediation
gene presence
Microbial target
Broad/Specific
phylogenetic and/or
functional groups
Marker isolation/amplification
Screening/hybridization PCR
Marker detection/analysis
Fingerprinting approaches
Cloning approaches
Elucidation of gene function and
regulation
Conceptual model of gene
function and regulation
gene activity
(DNA-based
methods)
(RNA-based
methods)
Fuse gene of
interest with
fluorescent
biomarker
(lux or gfp)
(Real time-PCR,
Competitive-PCR)
Quantify
bioluminescence
DNA analysis, mRNA
analysis with
microarrays
Environmental
proteomics
In Situ-approaches
RT-PCR
RT-PCR
DNA-SIP
RNA-SIP
RNA-SIP
RNA microarrays
DNA-SIP
FISH
DNA microarrays
Fingerprinting/ Cloning
approaches
In silico model of
cell function in
soil
Inference of function and regulation
from environmental conditions
under which genes are expressed
Fig. 4 Different genomic
approaches available to examine
microbial communities of
polluted soils. Microorganisms
isolated from the soil provide
information on their physiology
and on the gene composition
usable for the analysis of mRNA
and proteins that are extracted
directly from the soil. Genomic
DNA extracted from soil
furnishes data on the genetic
potential of microbial
communities. mRNA and proteins
provide information on
gene expression under different
environmental conditions. Comparison
of data from pure culture
and mixed communities yields
data for the development of
models of microbial function in
the soil (adapted from Lovley
2003)
Appl Microbiol Biotechnol (2007) 76:287–308 299
With an in situ mesocosm study, Hendrickx et al. 2005
examined the effect of a BTEX-contaminated groundwater
plume on the in situ dynamics of a bacterial aquifer
community and on the dynamics of specific BTEXcatabolic
genotypes within the community. A rapid colonization
of downstream aquifer material by Pseudomonas
spp. from the contaminated upstream area occurred, and the
new community remained stable over an extended time
period. Changes in the BTEX catabolic genotype structure
reflected the community change; in particular, the community
in the contaminated area was especially characterized
by the appearance of xylM/xylE1-(C23O)-like genotypes,
while in the uncontaminated area, only tmoA-like genotypes
were detected. Successively, a successful design of eight
new primer sets evidenced that tmoA-, xylM-, and xylE1-
like genes were the most frequently recovered in both soil
DNA and isolates from subsurface soils sampled at
different locations of the BTEX-contaminated site. While
xylM and xylE1 were only recovered from the contaminated
samples, tmoA was detected from both the contaminated
and noncontaminated samples (Hendricks et al. 2006).
tmoA and xylE genes were instead found significantly
higher in contaminated subsurface samples collected along
a BTEX concentration gradient at a fuel-oil-contaminated
site than in noncontaminated samples (Guo et al. 1997;
Cavalca et al. 2004).
Competitive quantitative PCR techniques that used as
PCR targets the conserved regions of the C23O genes
allowed to enumerate their gene copy number and to
correlate their relative abundances to pollutant levels. C23O
genes were enumerated by this technique with a 163-bp
competitor in a petroleum-amended soil using the same
primer. As a prerequisite, target and competitor should have
had identical amplification kinetics (Mesarch et al. 2000).
The intrinsic biodegradative potential of harbor sediments
contaminated with PAHs was examined in bioslurry
microcosms, during a 4-month treatment, by correlating the
microbial community structure, through PLFA analyses, to
catabolic gene presence and to PAH loss. PLFA analysis
revealed a threefold increase in total microbial biomass and
a dynamic microbial community composition, strongly
correlated with changes in the PAH chemistry. The copies
of genes associated with PAH degradation increased by
four orders of magnitude and shifts in gene copy numbers
correlated with shifts in specific subsets of extant microbial
community. Declines in the concentrations of phenanthrene
correlated with PLFA indicative of Rhodococcus spp. and/
or actinomycetes and genes encoding for naphtahalene-,
biphenyl-, and C23O-degradative enzymes (Ringelberg et
al. 2001).
Therefore, the greater numbers of catabolic gene
copies within a contaminated area, in comparison to
those in uncontaminated soils, can be used as evidence of
natural attenuation or of the effectiveness of engineered
bioremediation.
With a real-time PCR method, anaerobic toluenedegrading
bacteria were monitored by quantifying the bssA
gene with a primer–probe set in microcosms inoculated
with aquifer sediments and incubated anaerobically with
BTEX and nitrate in the presence and absence of ethanol
(Beller et al. 2002). Population trends were consistent with
observed toluene degrading activity: the microcosms with
the most rapid toluene degradation had the largest numbers
of bssA copies, where they increased from 100 up to 1,000
folds over the first 4 days of incubation, when most of the
toluene had been consumed.
DNA microarrays provide a mean for the simultaneous
analysis of many genes. Based on the types of probes
arrayed, microarrays for environmental studies can be
phylogenetic oligonucleotides, functional genes, and community
genoma arrays. The last type is constructed using
whole genomic or even large fragments of genomic DNA
originating from metagenomic libraries (Wu et al. 2004).
Although several phylogenetic microarray platforms
show great promise, the technical challenges of such
complex hybridization experiments, their limited quantitative
capabilities and the incomplete knowledge of extant
microbial diversity, still limit their widespread use (Zhou
2003). Both PCR-amplified fragments and nucleotides
derived from functional genes can be used to fabricate
functional gene arrays.
Recently, Rhee et al. 2004 developed a comprehensive
50-mer-based oligonucleotide microarray containing 1,657
probes from all 2,402 known genes involved in PAH and
BTEX biodegradation and metal reduction and used it to
monitor the biodegradation potential and activity of
enrichment cultures and soil microcosms supplemented
with naphthalene. With the developed 50-mer functional
gene array, they successfully detected changes in the
microbial community structures in enrichment and soil
microcosms depending on the incubation conditions. While
the naphthalene-degrading genes from Rhodococcus-type
bacteria were dominant in naphthalene enrichments, the
genes involved in naphthalene and PAH degradation from
Gram-negative bacteria like Ralstonia, Comamonas, and
Burkholderia were most abundant in soil microcosms.
Naphthalene-degrading genes from Pseudomonas were
never detected (Rhee et al. 2004). These results strengthen
the potentiality of this technology in monitoring bioremediation
processes in situ, although much work is needed to
improve detection sensitivity.
Expression of functional genes in the soil can be
monitored by detection of their transcription directly as
mRNA or via a reporter gene fused to the target gene.
Indeed, despite technical difficulties to extract purified
RNA at a sufficient yield from environmental samples for
300 Appl Microbiol Biotechnol (2007) 76:287–308
subsequent manipulation and analyses, a variety of methods
developed for mRNA extraction are now available to detect
the gene expression.
Numerous environmental factors can activate or repress
gene expression and thereby modulate microbial activity.
The influence of agents increasing PAH bioavailability on
the expression of the catabolic gene nahAC has been
studied by using a real-time PCR assay and to evaluate the
regulation of the nahAC gene during phenanthrene degradation
(Marlowe et al. 2002). Gene expression was
successfully determined by extraction of bacterial mRNA
followed by real-time PCR amplification of the nahAC
gene and of an internal housekeeping gene (rpoD). The
rpoD gene, which encodes a housekeeping sigma factor for
transcription initiation, served as a baseline control for
evaluation/interpretation of catabolic gene expression. With
this gene expression assay, temporal changes in nahAC
expression were shown when phenanthrene was degraded.
Thus, monitoring gene expression may allow detection of
subtle changes in the expression of degradative genes,
because of temporal changes in cell physiology or
changes in toxicity associated with accumulation of
intermediates.
An alternative molecular tool is to use biomarkers as
specific tags for the identification of specific bacteria or
gene activity. A biomarker is defined as a DNA sequence,
introduced in an organism, which confers a distinct
genotype or phenotype to enable monitoring in a given
environment. Bioluminescent, fluorescent, and chromogenic
marker genes, such as luxAB (bacterial luciferase), gfp
(green fluorescent protein, GFP), and xylE (catechol 2,3
oxygenase) genes, as well as reporter genes are examples of
promising biomarkers (Jansson 2003).
The choice of the biomarker and monitoring system
depends on the particular site, bacterial strain, and
sensitivity, and specificity of detection is required. Recently,
gfp was used to tag different environmental Mycobacterium
isolates able to degrade different PAHs. Confocal
laser microscopy was used to analyze both GFP- and PAHderived
fluorescence signals and allowed the bacteria to be
visualized in association with crystalline substrates (Wattiau
et al. 2002).
Reporter bacteria, also referred as bioreporters, are
equipped with reporter genes that encode a product, which
is easily assayed and related to metabolic activity or
specific gene expression of the host cell. Most of the
bioreporters use an environmentally or metabolically
responsive promoter, which is fused to a suitable reporter
gene and introduced into a microbial host. Host cells then
react to environmental stimuli by production of an easily
detectable reporter protein, thus informing on the conditions
that the cells encounter or on the status of the cells
themselves (Jansson 2003).
Environmental biosensors represent a breakthrough for
the monitoring of pollutants in contaminated matrices
because they have the unique ability to measure the
interaction of specific compounds with biological systems
through highly sensitive recognition processes.
One of the best known examples of a biosensor is the
use of a bioluminescent pseudomonad to monitor naphthalene.
When this strain was inoculated into lysimeters
contaminated with naphthalene, light emission was detected
using light pipes at different depths (Sayler et al. 2001).
In another study, a GFP-based Pseudomonas fluorescens
strain A506 biosensor was constructed for the detection of
BTEX in aqueous solutions (Stiner and Halverson 2002).
The biosensor was constructed by creating a transcriptional
fusion between gfp and toluene–benzene utilization (tbu)
pathway promoter of Ralstonia pickettii PKO1cells. The
biosensor cells were readily induced, and fluorescence
emission after a 3-h period of induction correlated well with
BTEX concentrations.
When not much is known about the genetics and
regulatory circuits involved in pollutant degradation, a
random mutant library can be made to screen for cells that
produce a response to a chemical from an indigenous
promoter. According to this strategy, the promoter probe
mini-Tn5-luxAB-tet was used to create a luxAB transcriptional
fusion responding to fluoreine in the fluorine-utilizing
bacterium Sphingomonas sp. LB126 (Bastiaens et al. 2001).
The mutant strain, named L-132, was impaired in fluorene
utilization and strongly emitted light upon addition of
fluorene to the growth medium.
FISH with rRNA-targeted nucleic acid probes (Lee et al.
1999; Ginige et al. 2004) or the combination of 16 S rRNA
FISH and 13C isotope data (Orphan et al. 2001) can be used
to directly identify active bacteria within complex samples
in a few hours.
To link results obtained using the catabolic-gene approach
to those of the rRNA approach, FISH with tyramide signal
amplification (TSA) has been used to detect intracellular
mRNA in microbial mats in high alpine lakes (Schonhuber et
al. 1999) A TSA-FISH method was developed and applied
to P. putida NCB9816-4 cells actively transcribing naphthalene
dyioxygenase (nahAC) and related genes in
environmental samples from a coal-tar-contaminated site,
thus documenting the in situ expression of specific genes in
individual cells (Bakermans and Madsen 2002). The
widespread use of TSA-FISH is still limited by the
databases usable to design probes and by differences in
cell permeabilization efficiency.
The potential for monitoring in situ microbial gene
expression in soils appears feasible. Metagenomics, i.e., the
genomic analysis of entire microbial communities, seems to
be a powerful approach to study the potential functions of
uncultivated microorganisms. Genomic DNA extracted
Appl Microbiol Biotechnol (2007) 76:287–308 301
from soil can be cloned, for example, into large cloning
vectors, based on the Escherichia coli F factor (99.2 kb)
and referred to as Bacterial Artificial Chromosomes
(BACs), to make libraries of environmental genomic
DNA (termed metagenomic libraries; Handelsman et al.
2002). The advantage of BAC vectors is that they may
maintain very large DNA inserts (greater than 600 kb)
stably in E. coli, facilitating the cloning of large fragments
of DNA. Moreover, the E. coli F factor replicon offers strict
copy number control that limits the number of BACs to one
to two copies per cell. Several authors have demonstrated
the utility of capturing community DNA in the form of
BAC libraries and of linking phylogenetic and functional
information within specific BAC clones, thus gaining new
perspectives on the microbial ecology of natural environments
(Rondon et al. 2000; Bèjà et al. 2002; Liles et al.
2003). For instance, for a particular soil microbial community,
Rondon et al. 2000 successfully constructed BAC libraries
with average insert sizes of 27- and 44.5-kb BAC libraries,
thus linking the phylogeny of uncultured soil microoorganisms
to their physiological and genetic activities encoded on
metagenomic fragments captured in BAC libraries; Bèjà et
al. 2002, instead, by characterizing BAC clones from a
natural microbial population containing identical or nearidentical
rRNA genes from planktonic crenarcheotes, found
the existence of a considerable functional diversity within
species that have an identical rRNA sequence. Potential
biases affecting the identification of BAC clones containing
rRNA genes include preferential amplification from the host
rDNA template, an inability to differentiate between host and
nonhost RFLP patterns and potential toxicity of heterologously
expressed rRNA gene operons.
Environmental DNA microarrays produced from the
genomic data could be used to analyze simultaneously the
expression of numerous genes in a given soil. However,
the use of microarrays has been limited to 16 S rRNA
markers or a relatively small set of functional genes, and no
practical approach has been developed to specifically target
the uncultivable majority of the species in the environment
(Sebat et al. 2003). Functional genomic and expression data
allow determining when a cell uses particular genes and
when it does not. However, the prediction of the functioning
of individual microorganisms in a complex environment
requires to have a holistic view of metabolism “in
silico models” (a computer representations of their in vivo
counterparts) that can describe the interactions of these
microorganisms with others of the community (Palsson
2000).
Monitoring of soil ecotoxicology and quality
As reported above, one of the main questions remaining
after a bioremediation process is to assess that the toxicity
at the contaminated site has been lowered and the site has
regained its initial biological activity and productivity.
Therefore, toxicity tests and biological activity measurements
may be used as potential monitoring tools or
bioindicators during and after bioremediation of contaminated
soils. They have been incorporated in the program for
ecological assessment of bioremediation at hazardous waste
sites and for supporting management decisions for remediation
(Hankard et al. 2004; Maila et al. 2005; Płaza et al.
2005). As chemical data alone are not sufficient to evaluate
the biological effects, ecotoxicological tests have been
recently used as supplementary tools to monitor bioremediation
of hydrocarbons, both in laboratory and field
studies, and to appropriately define acceptable cleanup
standards (Saterbak et al. 1999; Dorn and Salanitro 2000).
In a recent study by Płaza et al. 2005, the bioassays
Spirotox, Microtox, Ostracodtoxkit FTM, umu-test with S-
9 activation, and plant assays were applied and compared to
evaluate different bioremediation processes in heavily
petroleum-contaminated soils. They were shown to be
sensitive indicators for the assessment of the bioremediation
effectiveness and the evaluation of soil quality. Six
higher plant species (Secale cereale L., Lactuca sativa L.,
Zea mays L., Lepidium sativum L., Triticumvulgare L., and
Brassica oleracea L.) were used for bioassay tests based on
seed germination and root elongation. The test species
demonstrated varying sensitivity to soils after the different
bioremediation processes, and the effects on test organisms
well correlated with the soil contaminant concentration.
A different approach was utilized by Hankard et al. 2004
who investigated the response of two chemical-sensitive
earthworm biomarkers, lysosomal membrane stability measured
using the neutral red retention assay (NRR-T) and the
total immune activity (TIA) assay, after in situ exposure to
complexly contaminated field soils at three industrial sites
as well as urban and rural controls. Significantly lower
NRR-T and TIA were found in the contaminated soils when
compared to the two uncontaminated soil controls, thus
demonstrating their capability to successfully identify
significant exposure and biological effects caused by the
mixture of chemicals present.
The effect of PAHs and heavy metals on the soil
microbial activity and on some plants at an early stage of
their development was investigated in pot and laboratory
experiments by Maliszewska-Kordybach and Smreczak
2003. The results indicated that the dehydrogenase activity
appeared to be the most sensitive parameter to PAH
contamination (Maliszewska-Kordybach and Smreczak
2003). A high applicability of the dehydrogenase activity
for soil ecotoxicological testing and as a sensitive index for
measuring the toxicity of heavy metals and PAHs on
microbial communities present in soils was also suggested
by other authors (Rossel et al. 1997; Ihra et al. 2003).
302 Appl Microbiol Biotechnol (2007) 76:287–308
Scelza et al. 2007 investigated on a laboratory scale the
fate of phenanthrene, when added to a fresh, agricultural
soil with no history of PAH contamination and its influence
on various functionally enzymatic and biological related
properties. The biostimulation effect of compost and the
bioaugmentation efficiency of a phenanthrene-degrading
bacterial culture were also investigated. As a general
response, the intrinsic soil’s enzymatic activity was not
affected by exogenous microorganisms, whereas temporary
and permanent changes were observed for several of the
properties investigated in the presence of phenanthrene.
In a screening for total petroleum hydrocarbons (TPH)
and their toxicity to soil algal populations, microbial
biomass, and soil enzymes (dehydrogenase and urease) in
a long-term TPH-polluted site with reference to an adjacent
unpolluted site, a severe inhibition was observed in the soil
with a medium level of pollution as the result of a
combined effect of more than one chemical on the tested
parameters (Megharaj et al. 2000). The particular sensitivity
to the presence of a pollutant of algal species suggested
these latter as a useful pollution bioindicator.
Very low levels of enzyme activities and a different
bacterial diversity as assessed by DGGE profiles of the
16 S rDNA genes were found in soils heavily polluted by
PAHs as compared to an uncontaminated soil (Andreoni
et al. 2004).
In a recent review, Maila et al. 2005 have examined the
potential, the performance, the variability, and the failure of
several bioindicators including enzyme activities, seed
germination, earthworm survival, and microorganisms or
microbial bioluminescence. They concluded that at this
stage, there is no general guarantee of successful utilization
of biological activities as monitoring tools and these latter
should be complemented by existing traditional monitoring
tools. Indeed, “a number of methods can be used to assess
the extent of hydrocarbon contamination in soil. However,
the uniqueness or heterogeneity of the soil, the formation of
toxic metabolites and the influence of technology contribute
towards ‘poor’ bioindicator response of the different
biological activities. Chemical and toxicity data do not
always corroborate one another, and the results of each
toxicity test in a battery do not always agree, due to
each soil being unique in the response that it induces
and each toxicity test unique in its ability to detect
different contaminant levels in different soils” (Maila
et al. 2005).
When a qualitative and quantitative assessment of soil
quality has to be determined for a relatively unknown
situation, several properties must be measured. Usually, a
minimum data set (MDS) of soil properties or indicators are
selected that should be responsive, affordable, interpretable,
internationally accepted, and ecologically significant
(Doran and Parkin 1994).
Criteria for including particular soil properties in the
MDS depend on their relevance to the soil under examination.
The choice can be made from international literature,
and preliminary studies are needed to validate the selected
MDS and to standardize the sampling method. According
to the concept of soil quality, soil attributes that influence
the capacity of soil to perform crop production or
environmental functions and are sensitive to change in land
use, management, or conservation practices must be
included in MDS and evaluated simultaneously, using
statistical procedures that account for correlation among
soil attributes.
As also underlined above, a critical aspect to be considered
is the influence of soil components on the bioavailability of
the organic contaminant to soil biota. A battery of bioindicators
showing different sensitivity to contaminants could be
used, and their response in a contaminated soil as compared to
an uncontaminated one could be evaluated. Very often, the
choice of the uncontaminated control site may affect the
reliability of the investigation. Indeed, it can be difficult to
recognize a real control soil, which should be the same soil
lacking in only the addition of contaminants.
Practical application of bioremediation technologies
Because the scope of bioremediation is to decrease the
concentration of organic pollutants to levels undetectable
or, if measurable, lower than the limits established as safe
or tolerable by regulatory agencies, several criteria must be
met for it to be seriously considered as a practical method
for treatment.
These criteria can be summarized as follows: (a) microorganisms
must exist, and they must have the necessary
catabolic activity, (b) those organisms must have the
capacity to transform the compound at reasonable rates
and bring the concentrations to levels that meet regulatory
standards, (c) products that are toxic at the concentrations
likely to be achieved during remediation must not be
produced, (d) chemicals that are markedly inhibitory to the
biodegrading species must be absent at the site, (e) the
target compound(s) must be bioavailable, (f) conditions at
the site must exist or be made appropriate to sustain
microbial growth or activity, and (g) the technology must
be less or, at the worst, no more expensive than other
alternative technologies.
None of these criteria is negligible. If any one is not met,
either the biodegradative approach could be rejected, or the
cleanup goals could not be achieved.
To meet all of these criteria and successfully implement
a bioremediation technology, a multidisciplinary approach
and basic knowledge in microbiology, biochemistry, physiology,
ecology, and genetics are required. Moreover, much
Appl Microbiol Biotechnol (2007) 76:287–308 303
information about the factors controlling the growth and
metabolism of microorganism in polluted environments is
necessary because several of the above criteria are highly
empirical rather than knowledge based.
As outlined by Lovley 2003, “for bioremediation to
advance as a science, there is a strong need for the
comprehensive understanding of physiological properties
that genome-enabled approaches can provide.” The continued
generation of new information on the biochemistry,
genetics, and molecular biology of microbial degradative
pathways should expand opportunities for molecular environmental
analysis. Examining the presence and the
expression of the key genes involved in bioremediation
can yield more information on microbial processes than
analysis of 16 S rRNA sequences. However, the genes for
bioremediation can be present but not expressed. Often,
increased mRNA concentrations can be, at least, qualitatively
associated with high rates of contaminant degradation.
Highly sensitive methods that can detect mRNA for key
bioremediation genes in cells are now available, and
evaluation of the metabolic state of degrading microorganisms
could help to identify modifications in the contaminated
environments that might promote bioremediation.
On the other hand, contributions by environmental
chemists, engineers, hydrogeologists, and soil scientists are
necessary to design a system well tailored to the contamination
problem and possessing optimal environmental conditions
for the action of the decontaminating organism.
Furthermore, an economical evaluation of the overall bioremediation
program by economists is also required to assess
the use of the remediation technique as a competitive and
alternative decontamination strategy.
Once a bioremediation program has been designed, its
feasibility can be evaluated by considering: (a) the applicability,
strictly related to the properties of the contaminants
and the environmental, biological, and hydrogeochemical
features of the contaminated site, (b) the treatability studies
to determine the potential for bioremediation, to define
required operating and management practices, to design and
implement the bioremediation plan, and to establish a
suitable and effective monitoring program, (c) the possible
limitations and drawbacks, and (d) the advantages linked
to its potential of harnessing naturally occurring biogeochemical
processes, immobilizing or destroying, partially or
completely, contaminants.
Only when all these conditions are met, a successful,
productive, not-deleterious of soil quality, and costly convenient
bioremediation process will occur.
