Microbial communities involved in anaerobic degradation of alkanes

    Serge Maurice Mbadingaa, Li-Ying Wanga, Lei Zhoua, Jin-Feng Liua, Ji-Dong Gub, Bo-Zhong Mua, , 

 Show more

        https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ibiod.2010.11.009
    Get rights and content

Abstract

Saturated hydrocarbons are quantitatively the most abundant fraction among all petroleum hydrocarbons. Significant advances have been made in the understanding of the anaerobic biodegradability of alkanes in terms of the microorganisms involved and the biochemical pathways over the past two decades. They can be used as carbon and energy sources by diverse physiological groups of microorganisms (isolates or consortia) grown under chlorate-reducing, nitrate-reducing, sufidogenic or methanogenic conditions. Two general biochemical mechanisms have been proposed for the initial activation of alkanes including addition of fumarate and carboxylation. However, glycyl radical enzymes dependent fumarate addition which yields alkyl-substituted succinate appear to be the most commonly shared mechanism for the anaerobic attack of alkanes under various redox conditions by phylogenetically diverse microorganisms. The genes encoding the candidate alkylsuccinate synthase have been recently described in alkane-degrading sulfate- and nitrate-reducers as well as in hydrocarbon-rich environments. Alternative mechanisms may also be available depending on the alkane-degrading microbial community and electron acceptors utilized.
Keywords

    Alkanes; Alkylsuccinate synthase; Alkylsuccinates; Anaerobic degradation; Methanogenic degradation of alkanes; Microbial communities

1. Introduction

Petroleum (crude oil) is a complex mixture that contains thousands of distinctively different chemical components, but mainly hydrocarbon. Hydrocarbon composition of crude oil can be separated into four main fractions; namely saturated hydrocarbons, aromatic, resins and asphaltenes. These compounds are relatively less reactive due to the lack of functional groups and low water solubility. Nevertheless, microorganisms can grow with hydrocarbons as the sole source of carbon and energy coupled with different electron acceptors. However, the initial attack of hydrocarbons remains the critical step for the subsequent metabolism of these apolar substrates. Furthermore, the incorporation of molecular oxygen into the hydrocarbon molecules by the activity of oxygenases in the initial step is a strictly oxygen-dependent biochemical process and energetically favorable (Chakraborty and Coates, 2004 ;  Wentzel et al., 2007). However, biodegradation of hydrocarbons in the absence of molecular oxygen is often hindered by the chemical inertness of the carbon–carbon bonds. Obviously, microorganisms capable of anaerobic biodegradation of hydrocarbons must have developed alternative, oxygen-independent biochemical reactions and the required enzymes for the initial attack of these substrates under oxygen-limited conditions. Today, anaerobic degradation of hydrocarbons remains an interesting area of research for understanding the mechanisms of petroleum biodegradation in oil reservoirs, and for bioremediation of oil-contaminated environments. Major attention has recently been paid to the microbial ecology of petroleum reservoirs, where anaerobes are the dominant microorganisms (Magot et al., 2000; Röling et al., 2003 ;  Li et al., 2007). Isolation and/or characterization of such microorganisms are of great importance for understanding of the biochemical mechanisms responsible for oil biodegradation in natural environments and in petroleum reservoirs.

The anaerobic biodegradability of hydrocarbons has been investigated since the 1940s, however, the biodegradation/biotransformation of these compounds in the absence of molecular oxygen was conclusively demonstrated only about two decades ago via methanogenesis of toluene and benzene (Vogel and Grbic-Galic, 1986 ;  Grbic-Galic and Vogel, 1987). Later on, toluene was shown to be completely oxidized to CO2 by pure cultures of the Fe(III)-reducing Geobacter metallireducens strain GS-15 ( Lovley et al. 1989). These studies led the way to the isolation and characterization of novel microorganisms capable of oxidizing a diverse range of hydrocarbons under the dominant terminal electron accepting processes occurring under anoxic environments including sulfate, nitrate, oxidized metals – such as iron(III) and manganese(IV) – and CO2 ( Heider et al., 1999; Widdel and Rabus, 2001 ;  Chakraborty and Coates, 2004).

Biodegradation of alkanes in anoxic environments has been for years a subject of debate only at the theoretical level. The first experimental demonstration of this hypothesis was accomplished by the quantitative measurement of the consumption of n-alkanes by sulfate-reducing bacteria ( Aeckersberg et al. 1991). Since then, sulfate-, nitrate- and chlorate-reducing bacteria grown anaerobically with saturated hydrocarbons as the sole carbon and energy sources have been demonstrated. Furthermore, the isolated anaerobic alkane-degrading microorganisms were not closely related to previously established species, e.g., Desulfovibrio or Pseudomonas strains, and revealed novel species or genera ( Aeckersberg et al., 1991; Aeckersberg et al., 1998 ;  Ehrenreich et al., 2000). In addition, anaerobic biodegradation of alkanes has also been supported with enriched microbial communities utilizing sulfate ( Kropp et al., 2000; Gieg and Suflita, 2002 ;  Savage et al., 2010) and nitrate ( Bregnard et al., 1997 ;  Callaghan et al., 2009) as the terminal electron acceptor, or under methanogenic conditions ( Zengler et al., 1999; Anderson and Lovley, 2000; Gieg et al., 2008 ;  Jones et al., 2008).

The main scope of this review lies on the diversity and physiology of microorganisms capable of anaerobic degradation of alkanes under nitrate, sulfidogenic, chlorate and methanogenic conditions. No studies have been reported on the degradation of alkanes under iron-reducing conditions so far. For biodegradation of aromatic hydrocarbons, current information is available in reviews by Chakraborty and Coates, 2004 ;  Foght, 2008 and references therein. Given the scope of the current review, a brief overview of the anaerobic metabolism of alkanes is provided, with emphasize on the predominant role of glycyl radical enzyme-dependent fumarate addition which results in the formation of methyl branched alkylsuccinates.
2. Anaerobic degradation of alkanes

Alkanes that have been shown to be biodegradable under anoxic conditions can be classified into linear (general formula CnH2n+2), branched (general formula CnH2n+2, n > 3) and cyclic (general formula CnH2n, n > 2). From a thermodynamic point of view, anaerobic biodegradation of alkanes with various electron acceptors is feasible (see Table 1 with hexadecane as a model substrate). Biodegradation of alkanes by specific groups of microorganisms is discussed below.

3. Nitrate-reducers

Anaerobic degradation of hydrocarbons under nitrate-reducing conditions has been regarded as an effective strategy for bioremediation of crude oil, fuel-contaminated aquifers and underground storage tanks (Rabus and Widdel 1996). The use of nitrate for in situ remediation of these contaminated environments has been driven not only by the favorable energetics of nitrate reduction but also by high water solubility and mobility of nitrate (92.1 g/100 ml water at 25 °C). Crude oil and its refined products constitute the major sources of alkanes in the environment (Ehrenreich et al. 2000). Due to their very low solubility in water, long-chain alkanes (>C12) are generally not considered as toxic. However, at high concentrations, relatively short-chain alkanes (C5–C12) and cyclic alkanes have negative effects on biological membranes ( Gill and Ratledge, 1972; Sikkema et al., 1994 ;  Sikkema et al., 1995). The fate of alkanes and the effectiveness of bioremediation strategies under such conditions require a better knowledge of the biochemical capacities of nitrate-reducing microorganisms.

Anaerobic oxidation of hydrocarbons coupled to the reduction of nitrate was first demonstrated with pure isolates (strains ToN1, mXyN1, EbN1, and PbN1) for utilization of alkylbenzenes in crude oil (Rabus and Widdel 1996). Furthermore, a nitrate-reducing enrichment culture incubated with crude oil did not show any degradation of alkanes (C5 to C12) until alkylbenzenes (C1 to C3) were completely depleted. This indicated that the enrichment culture exhibited biphasic growth, in which alkanes were only partially consumed, and among them, n-hexane appeared to be the preferred substrate. Cell hybridization further revealed that the majority of the enriched denitrifiers affiliated with the β-subclass of the Proteobacteria ( Rabus et al. 1999).

Ecological distribution of anaerobic hydrocarbons degrading denitrifiers is not restricted to hydrocarbon-contaminated habitats since they have been commonly isolated from non-contaminated environments (Fries et al., 1994; Song et al., 1999 ;  Zwolinski et al., 2000). The currently known pure isolates of alkane-degrading nitrate respiring bacteria (NRB) are affiliated with the β- and γ-subclass of the Proteobacteria. At least six axenic cultures of alkane-degrading NRB have been documented so far ( Fig. 1 and Table 2). Strains OcN1 and HxN1were isolated with n-octane and n-hexane, respectively, from enrichment cultures prepared from ditch sediments. The two isolates are members of the family Rhodocyclaceae within the β-Proteobacteria ( Ehrenreich et al. 2000). These strains are able to grow for complete oxidation of C6–C12n-alkanes to CO2 with transitory production of nitrite observed during the growth of strain HxN1 (Ehrenreich et al. 2000). When grown anaerobically with crude oil, strain HxN1 has been shown to co-metabolize short-chain (C4–C5) and cyclic alkanes (cyclopentane and methylcyclo-pentane) in addition to the utilization of C6 to C8n-alkanes as substrates ( Wilkes et al. 2003). This is of great interest because n-butane, n-propane and cyclic alkanes as single substrate could not support the growth of strain HxN1, indicating that such co-metabolism of structurally diverse substrates is catalyzed by enzymes which are needed for the metabolism of the growth-supporting substrates, but exert activities on co-substrates due to “relaxed substrate specificities” similar to that observed with anaerobic alkylbenzene-degrading bacteria ( Beller and Spormann, 1999 ;  Wilkes et al., 2003).

Based on 16S rRNA gene sequence (Fig. 1), strain HxN1 forms a phylogenetic cluster with alkylbenzenes degrading isolates such as strains PbN1 and EbN1 (98–99% similarity). This cluster was originally described as Azoarcus species ( Rabus and Widdel, 1995 ;  Rabus and Widdel, 1996) on the basis of 16S rRNA gene, but was recently reclassified as Aromatoleum species ( Wöhlbrand et al., 2007 ;  Grundmann et al., 2008). Strain OcN1, however, is closely related (97–98% similarity) to pure isolates capable of anaerobic benzene degradation, e.g., Dechloromonas sp. JJ and RCB ( Coates et al. 2001).

Anaerobic oxidation of long-chain n-alkanes (>C12) coupled to the reduction of nitrate is apparently restricted to members of the γ-Proteobacteria. Axenic cultures include strain HdN1 from activated sludge ( Ehrenreich et al. 2000), Marinobacter sp. BC36 and BP42 from Berre lagoon microbial mats ( Bonin et al. 2004) and the recently described denitrifying bacterium Pseudomonas balearica strain BerOc6 from a brakish lagoon ( Grossi et al. 2008). These cultured members of the γ-Proteobacteria are able to oxidize n-alkanes ranging from C14 to C20. Phylogenetic analysis, based on 16S rRNA gene sequences, shows that strain HdN1 forms its own cluster and probably represent a new lineage within the γ-Proteobacteria. Recently, molecular-based microbial community analysis of a nitrate-reducing enrichment amended with n-hexadecane as the sole source of carbon and energy revealed the dominant presence of several members of the Proteobacteria. One sequence retrieved from a DGGE profile was 82% similar to the anaerobic alkane-degrading nitrate reducer strain HdN1 ( Callaghan et al. 2009).

Anaerobic oxidation of branched and cyclic alkanes has also been demonstrated to occur under nitrate-reducing conditions. Pristane (2,6,10,14-tetramethylpentadecane, C19H40), formerly regarded as recalcitrant under anaerobic conditions, has been shown to be biodegraded under nitrate-reducing conditions in enrichment cultures obtained from a diesel fuel-contaminated sediments (Bregnard et al. 1997). Within the cycloalkanes family, cyclohexane has always been the model substrate for biodegradation studies (Trower et al., 1985 ;  Rouvière and Chen, 2003), however all these studies were conducted under aerobic conditions. As described above, the first direct evidence for the anaerobic oxidation of cycloalkanes, e.g., cyclopentane was found in the nitrate-reducing strain HxN1 grown anaerobically with n-alkanes from crude oil, the identity of the microorganisms capable of anaerobic degradation of cycloalkanes under nitrate-reducing conditions is still unknown. A recent study on anaerobic degradation of cyclohexane under nitrate-reducing conditions resulted in the co-enrichment of members of the δ-Proteobacteria and Planctomycetales. This enriched culture of freshwater denitrifying bacteria grown anaerobically with cyclohexane as the sole carbon and energy source was dominated by 16S rRNA gene sequence related to Geobacter spp. (∼75% of all cells as detected by phylogenetic analysis and fluorescent whole-cell hybridization using type-specific probe), the likely cyclohexane-degrader. Subsequent nitrite produced during growth of the consortium was not consumed unless extra ammonium was added to the medium. These observations indicated that the Planctomycetales (anammox bacteria) as a partner, approximating 18% of all cells, was consuming nitrite via anaerobic ammonium oxidation ( Musat et al. 2010). Such symbiotic association between hydrocarbon-degraders and anammox bacteria can be extrapolated from environments such as petroleum reservoirs where anammox bacteria have also been identified as potential contributors to the nitrogen recyclers (Li et al. 2010). It should be reminded that Geobacter species are often the predominant microorganisms found in hydrocarbon-contaminated environments in which Fe(III)-reduction occur ( Zwolinski et al. 2000) and given that Fe(III)-reduction coupled to alkanes degradation has not yet been unequivocally demonstrated despite some experimental attempts (So and Young 2001), it is reasonable to assume that Geobacter spp. related to those identified by Musat et al. (2010) may be able to accomplish this task.
4. Sulfidogenic microorganisms

The research interest in hydrocarbons utilization by sulfidogenic microorganisms stems from observations of sulfide formation during maturation of oil reservoirs. Indeed, these microorganisms have always been identified or isolated from hydrocarbon-rich environments such as in petroleum deposits, hydrocarbon seeps, methane hydrates, petroleum-rich hydrothermal sediments, underground oil storage tanks and hydrocarbon-contaminated sediments (Magot et al., 2000; Watanabe et al., 2000 ;  Dhillon et al., 2003). Phylogenetic analysis based on 16S rRNA and functional genes suggest that sulfate-reducing bacterial (SRB) communities retrieved from these environments are predominantly affiliated with members of the family Desulfobacteraceae within the δ-Proteobacteria. Most members of this family are strict anaerobes that perform complete oxidation of organic compounds. In contrast to nitrate reducers, sulfate-reducers that anaerobically oxidize saturated hydrocarbons are likely indigenous to hydrocarbon-rich environments ( Table 3). Eight mesophilic alkane-degrading sulfate-reducers have been isolated and reported in the literature. Among them, cultured members of the Desulfococcus/Desulfatibacillum cluster including Desulfococcus oleovorans Hxd3 from oil-water separator ( Aeckersberg et al. 1991), strain Pnd3 from petroleum-contaminated marine sediment (Aeckersberg et al. 1998), Desulfatibacillum alkenivorans AK-01 from petroleum-contaminated estuarine sediments ( So and Young 1999b) and Desulfatibacillum aliphaticivorans CV2803T from hydrocarbon-polluted marine sediments (Cravo-Laureau et al. 2004) are able to grow by oxidizing n-alkanes ranging from C12 to C20. The n-hexane and n-decane oxidizing SRB strain PL2 was recently isolated from a p-xylene degrading sulfate-reducing community. This member of the family Desulfobacteraceae shared >97% 16S rRNA gene sequence similarities with the aromatic hydrocarbons degrading strain oXyS1 and with other members of the Desulfosarcina such as Desulfosarcina variabilis and Desulfosarcina cetonicum ( Higashioka et al. 2009). The alkane-oxidizing SRB, strain BuS5, isolated from marine hydrocarbon seeps is only able to grow with propane and butane. This strain clusters within the Desulfosarcina/Desulfococcus, however no genus designation has been given so far ( Kniemeyer et al. 2007). In addition, enrichment cultures have been obtained from Gulf of Mexico sediments grown with butane as the sole substrate at 12 °C. Potentially cold-adapted SRB clone Butane12-GMe, the dominant bacteria, fell into the Desulfosarcina/Desulfococcus cluster and was most closely related to strain BuS5 ( Kniemeyer et al. 2007). More recently, Desulfobacteraceae-affiliated microorganisms capable of degradation of short-chain n-alkanes appeared to be the predominant members of mesophilic propane and pentane oxidizing sulfate-reducing enrichments derived from non-marine sediments. Surprisingly, most of the clones retrieved from these enrichment cultures shared only 88–95% with strain BuS5, indicating the existence of a probably large diversity of sulfate-reducing microorganisms involved in the biodegradation of short-chain n-alkanes ( Savage et al. 2010).

Field investigations via molecular phylogenetic monitoring of a sulfate-reducing community incubated in situ for more than 500 days with oil contaminated sediments from 20 m water depth in a Mediterranean coastal area revealed that many of the most abundant sequences were closely related (94–98% similarity) to several alkane-degrading SRB members of the δ-Proteobacteria. At the lower and anoxic sediments layers, alkanes ranging from C17 to C30 were significantly removed. Of all the clones retrieved from the community, 41–54% fell within the genera Desulfococcus, Desulfonema and Desulfosarcina of the family Desulfobacteraceae ( Miralles et al. 2007).

In addition to the Desulfobacteraceae, two novel sulfate-reducing strains affiliated with the family Syntrophobacteraceae within the δ-Proteobacteria were recently isolated from oilfield production water and from an oily sludge. The two strains, Desulfoglaeba alkanexedens ALDCT and Lake, are phylogenetically close to each other and are able to grow by complete oxidation of C6–C12n-alkanes ( Davidova et al. 2006).

Thermophilic alkane-degrading sulfate-reducers are very rare; only one isolate has been reported in the literature. Using sediments from Guaymas basin (a site of hydrothermal activities in the Gulf of California), Rueter et al. (1994) developed an anoxic enrichment with sulfate reducing activity in the presence of crude oil at 60 °C. Subsequently, axenic culture referred to as Desulfothermus naphthae TD3T was isolated from this enrichment which was capable of oxidizing n-alkanes. Phylogenetic analysis showed that the thermophilic sulfate-reducer strain TD3T forms a distinct cluster within the family Desulfohalobiaceae. The strain is closely related to another thermophilic sulfate-reducer, Desulfothermus okinawensis TFISO9T (AB264617), isolated from a deep-sea hydrothermal field at the Yonaguni Knoll IV (Southern Okinawa Trough) with 16S rRNA sequence similarity of 96% (Nunoura et al. 2007). To date, Desulfothermus naphthae TD3T and Desulfothermus okinawensis TFISO9T are the sole representative species of the genus Desulfothermus. Other genera included in the Desulfohalobiaceae are Desulfohalobium, Desulfonatronovibrio and Desulfonauticus.

Anaerobic oxidation of alkanes is not restricted to members of the δ-Proteobacteria ( Fig. 2). The thermophilic propane-oxidizer clone Propane60-GuB, retrieved from Guaymas Basin sediment, is a member of the genus Desulfotomaculum within the Peptococcaceae (Firmicutes) ( Kniemeyer et al. 2007). Anaerobic degradation of branched and cyclic alkanes has been rarely investigated under sulfate-reducing conditions. The biodegradation of ethylcyclopentane (ECP) by a sulfate-reducing community derived from an aquifer contaminated by hydrocarbons has nevertheless been reported (Rios-Hernandez et al. 2003). Molecular analysis of the community revealed a diverse collection of phylotypes belonging to genera Syntrophobacter (δ-Proteobacteria) and Desulfotomaculum (Peptococcaceae, Firmicutes) as well as members of the Cytophaga-Flexibacter-Bacteroides group. The authors speculated that the sulfate-reducer phylogenetically affiliated with the genus Desulfotomaculum would have been responsible for the degradation of ECP ( Rios-Hernandez et al., 2003 ;  Bonin et al., 2004). Other studies have indirectly indicated the presence of microbial communities responsible for degrading volatile alicyclic alkanes (constituents of gasoline and natural gas condensate) under sulfate-reducing conditions (Townsend et al. 2004).
Another important group of sulfidogens is represented by hyperthermophilic archaeal members of the genus Archaeoglobus and the order Thermococcales. These strictly anaerobic microorganisms mostly thrive in hydrothermal environments and in subsurface thermophillic petroleum reservoirs ( Stetter et al., 1987; Beeder et al., 1994; Magot et al., 2000; Miroshnichenko et al., 2001 ;  Gittel et al., 2009). Knowledge about their electron donors under in situ conditions is scarce. For instance, Archaeoglobus-related species are not known to utilize alkanes. Nevertheless, direct evidence shows that Archaeoglobus fulgidus strain VC-16 that was previously isolated from heated sea floor at Volcano, Italy ( Stetter et al. 1987) and later from hot oil field waters in the North Sea (Beeder et al. 1994) is able to reduce thiosulfate coupled with the anaerobic oxidation of n-alkenes (C12:1–C21:1) at 70 °C (Khelifi et al. 2010). To date only some mesophilic sulfate-reducing, alkane-degrading bacteria have been reported to be able to utilize alkenes (Cravo-Laureau et al. 2004). However, it has not yet been completely ruled out that members of the genus Archaeoglobus would be able to oxidize alkanes. In addition, strain VC-16 can also metabolize a wide range of fatty acids (C4–C18) with thiosulfate as the electron acceptor (Khelifi et al. 2010). This latter capability not only confirms the formerly predicted and controversial β-oxidation pathway in this strain ( Klenk et al. 1997), but also indicate that Archaeoglobus-related organisms may represent important partners in complex microbial communities.

Hyperthermophilic archaeal of the order Thermococcales are actually represented by three genera: Paleococcus, Pyrococcus and Thermococcus (Ribosomal Database Project Release 10; rdp.cme.msu.edu) (Cole et al. 2009). Physiologically, most members of Thermococcales are organotrophs that gain metabolic energy via fermentation of complex organic compounds such as peptides or yeast extract ( Bertoldo and Antranikian 2006). They all share a common physiological feature of reducing elemental sulfur (S0) to sulfide (Magot et al. 2000). It is worth noting that members belonging to the genus Thermococcus are frequently found more abundant in samples retrieved from hot oil reservoirs ( Orphan et al., 2000 ;  Nazina et al., 2006) and in hydrothermal habitats compared to the Paleococcus and Pyrococcus species ( Lee et al. 2008). Consequently, Thermococcus species are considered to play a significant role in the metabolic activities of complex microbial consortia occurring within such natural high temperature habitats ( Lee et al. 2008). However, no members of the Thermococcus were known to utilize alkanes until very recently when the growth of Thermococcus sibiricus at 78 °C was shown to be stimulated by hexadecane. Reproducible growth was observed after successive transfers of T. sibiricus on medium amended with hexadecane as the sole source of carbon and energy ( Mardanov et al. 2009). Elemental sulfur as an electron acceptor is not absolutely required but stimulates growth. The strain, which was isolated from a non-water flooded hot oil reservoir located in Western Siberia (Miroshnichenko et al. 2001), did not grow in the presence of aromatic hydrocarbons. Sulfate and thiosulfate are not utilized as alternative electron acceptors. Moreover, several genes encoding new physiological properties of T. sibiricus were identified on the basis of genomic sequence analysis. Open reading frames (ORFs) similar to those identified in Thermococcus kodakaraensis were found and described as pyruvate-formate lyase (PFL) (see Section 7.1). Since T. kodakaraensis has never been reported to grow with alkanes, its PFL enzyme was suggested to play a role in pyruvate metabolism. Due to the lack of more accurate experimental data on this previously unknown physiological feature of T. sibiricus, definitive classification as PFL or alkylsuccinate synthase for the identified homologous genes could not be made due to the large divergence observed within glycyl radical enzymes (GRE) superfamily ( Mardanov et al., 2009 ;  Callaghan et al., 2010). This requires further investigation to elucidate the likely role of this probably new enzyme.
5. Methanogenesis

Methanogenesis is referred to as the biological formation of methane that is carried out by strictly anaerobic microorganisms. The anaerobic decomposition of complex organic matter to methane requires the concerted effort of metabolically different types of microorganisms. Typically, this mutual dependence is commonly described as syntrophic cooperation based on the transfer of formate, hydrogen and acetate from fermentative organisms to methanogens. The overall biodegradation process becomes thermodynamically favorable only when the methanogenic substrates generated during the ‘cracking’ of complex organic matter are promptly used by methanogens in order to keep their concentrations at a very low level (Schink 1997).

The greatest energy conservation with a given alkane substrate is obviously to be expected when nitrate, nitrite, chlorate or ferric iron is used as the final electron acceptor. Methanogenic degradation is the least energetically favorable process when compared to other anaerobic respirations (Table 1).

The biodegradation of alkanes under methanogenic conditions was first demonstrated in highly enriched cultures obtained from ditch mud with the ability to convert hexadecane into methane and CO2 (Zengler et al. 1999), so far no isolates had been obtained and only a few studies have provided the phylogeny of microorganisms potentially involved in this syntrophic association (Zengler et al., 1999; Gieg et al., 2008 ;  Jones et al., 2008). In the ditch mud methanogenic enrichment degrading hexadecane, it was assumed that the community was essentially composed of: (i) syntrophic proton-reducing acetogenic bacteria (Syntrophus spp.) which decompose the alkane to acetate and H2; (ii) a group of archaea (Methanosaeta) which form methane and CO2 from acetate; and (iii) another group of archaea (Metanospirillum and Methanoculleus) converting CO2 and H2 to methane (Zengler et al. 1999). In this enrichment, it was suggested that more than 2/3 of the methane produced was from acetate. Similarly, in the methanogenic residual oil degrading enrichment culture derived from a gas condensate contaminated subsurface sediments, the archaeal sequences, whose closest matches were almost exclusively cultivated methanogens, were predominantly affiliated with acetoclastic Methanosaeta spp. The eubacterial clone library was more diverse, with the majority of sequences (78.6% clone frequency based on 16S rRNA) related to Firmicutes (6 phylotypes), including some presumptive Gram-positive sulfate-reducing, hydrocarbon-degrading genera related to Pelotomaculum spp. ( Gieg et al., 2008 ;  Abu Laban et al., 2009) as well as the syntrophic bacteria Desulfotomaculum cluster I ( Gieg et al. 2008). Among the other constituents of the eubacterial community were members of the δ-Proteobacteria (Desulfobulbus, Desulfovibrio and Smithella), as well as fermentative bacteria affiliated with Chloroflexi, Bacteroidetes and Actinobacteria ( Gieg et al. 2008). Data obtained from the methanogenic enrichment cultures described above suggest that acetoclastic methanogenesis may represent an important biochemical pathway for the formation of methane from crude oil components. This assumption is further supported by thermodynamic calculations indicating that hexadecane conversion to methane is driven primarily through acetoclastic methanogenesis (Dolfing et al. 2008).

In contrast, the methanogenic oil alkane-degrading enrichment derived from estuarine sediments was found to be dominated by Syntrophus spp. and CO2-reducing methanogens among several other phylotypes (Jones et al. 2008). Thus, the principal route whereby oil alkanes are converted to methane was assumed to involve syntrophic alkane conversion to acetate and hydrogen linked to syntrophic acetate oxidation to H2 and CO2 and coupled with methanogenesis from CO2-reduction—the so called MADCOR process. This assumption is supported by modeling of isotopic signatures for CO2 and methane gases collected from heavily degraded oils of the mesothermic Peace River Oil Sands (Western Canada) suggesting that hydrogenotrophic methanogenesis (∼75–92%) likely predominates in subsurface degraded oil reservoirs (Jones et al. 2008). Furthermore, the main occurrence of CO2-reducing methanogens in oil reservoirs production waters and in enrichments derived from there also suggest that hydrogenotrophic methanogenesis may predominates in petroleum reservoirs ( Magot et al., 2000; Orphan et al., 2000 ;  Grabowski et al., 2005). In addition, there is evidence indicating that in most cases methanogenesis from acetate in oil reservoirs production waters is driven primarily through syntrophic acetate oxidation to H2 and CO2 coupled to methanogenesis from CO2-reduction ( Nazina et al., 2006 ;  Mayumi et al., 2010). More recently, the archaeal community composition observed in the thermophilic enrichment derived from oilfield production fluids with the ability to convert oil alkanes to methane was only represented by hydrogen-oxidizers affiliated with the family Methanobacteriaceae; while bacterial community was dominated by fermentative and/or syntrophic organisms affiliating with the orders Thermotogales, Synergistales, Deferribaterales and Firmicutes. These results again support the assumption of the major role of methanogenic CO2-reduction involved in the decomposition of oil alkanes in subsurface petroleum reservoirs (Gieg et al. 2010). Furthermore, since acetoclastic methanogenesis is likely inhibited upon exposure to 10 % (v/v) of crude oil (the oil was collected at a site contaminated by crude oil and creosote) (Warren et al. 2004) and in situations where acetoclastic methanogenesis might be limited/or absent, syntrophic acetate oxidation coupled to methanogenesis from CO2-reduction is thermodynamically favored, offering the greatest window of opportunity for the successful methanogenic decomposition of oil alkane ( Karakashev et al., 2006 ;  Dolfing et al., 2008).

Overall, these findings indicate that the particular methanogenic route of oil alkane is likely dictated by the sampling source of the microbial community and when appropriate, thermodynamics should take into account the contribution of biological factors (Zwolinski et al., 2000 ;  Dolfing et al., 2008). Other studies have demonstrated that alkanes depletion is coupled to methane production, indicating the presence of microbial communities syntrophically converting alkanes to methane (Anderson and Lovley, 2000; Grossi et al., 2000; So and Young, 2001; Townsend et al., 2003 ;  Siddique et al., 2006).
6. Other electrons acceptors

Anaerobic oxidation of organic substrates coupled to sulfate and nitrate reduction yields relatively less amount of energy, particularly when compared to oxidation with oxygen as the electron acceptor. It might be possible that other electron acceptors such as perchlorate and nitrite could be coupled to anaerobic oxidation of alkanes. Perchlorate and chlorate as well as nitrite are ideal electron acceptors for microorganisms due to their high redox potentials (ClO4−/Cl−, E0 = +1.287 V; ClO3−/Cl−, E0 = +1.03 V; 2NO2−/N2, E0 = +0.958 V; 2NO/N2, E0 = +1.264; N2O/N2 = +1.355 V) ( Coates and Achenbach, 2004 ;  Zedelius et al., 2010). Indeed, Mehboob et al. (2009) recently reported that Pseudomonas chloritidismutans AW-1T, isolated from sludge of an anaerobic chlorate-reducing bioreactor, was able to use n-decane as the sole carbon and energy source under strictly anaerobic conditions with chlorate as electron acceptor ( Table 2). Perchlorate and chlorate reduction, which are only induced under anoxic conditions, proceed according to the equation described in Fig. 3C. Molecular oxygen generated during the dismutation or disproportionation of chlorite (ClO2− → Cl− + O2; ΔG° = −148.4 kJ/mol) is subsequently used to oxidize the alkane substrate. Hence the degradation of alkanes under such conditions is assumed to proceed by means of oxygenases under unusual anaerobic process. Here chlorate is not only the electron acceptor but also the oxygen supplier for oxygenases activities (Mehboob et al. 2009). Given that high concentrations of dissolved oxygen are known to inhibit perchlorate and chlorate reduction (Xu et al. 2004), free oxygen generated as an intermediate must be promptly consumed so that it does not accumulate to high levels. In addition, P. chloritidismutans AW-1T is able to use nitrate as an electron acceptor, however in such situation no growth was observed with n-decane. This shows that oxidation of alkanes coupled to chlorate reduction is a particular physiological feature for strain AW-1T.
A much recent way to form molecular oxygen as a metabolite intermediate is the dismutation of nitric oxide (NO) during nitrite reduction (NO2−) in the methane-utilizing enrichment culture (Ettwig et al. 2010). Nitric oxide is an intermediate of the well known microbial nitrate reduction (NO3− → NO2− → NO → N2O → N2); however, in the methane-utilizing enrichment culture described by Ettwig et al. (2010), the sequential reduction of nitrite appear to proceed otherwise. Experimental evidences indicated that ‘Candidatus Methylomirabilis oxyfera’ (the dominant bacterium in the methane-utilizing enrichment culture) reduces nitrite (NO2−) to nitric oxide (2NO), after which nitric oxide undergoes a dismutation reaction to yield nitrogen (N2) and molecular oxygen (O2). The oxygen generated is subsequently used to oxidize the methane substrate to methanol. This nitrite-linked oxidation of methane resembles, in principle, anaerobic oxidation of alkane via chlorate reduction. Therefore, it is possible, even likely that other denitrifiers’ organisms with similar physiological features may be able to couple the oxidation of alkanes with various chain lengths to the reduction of nitrite via nitric oxide dismutation ( Ettwig et al., 2010 ;  Zedelius et al., 2010).
7. Biochemical strategies for the anaerobic metabolism of alkanes

The initial activation of alkanes is critical for their anaerobic biodegradation. During the past decade numerous studies have been undertaken to elucidate the activation mechanisms of alkanes under anoxic conditions. Indeed, anaerobic microorganisms have developed unprecedented biochemical strategies to overcome the chemically inert nature of alkanes (Heider 2007). These strategies involved in the initial attack of alkanes include activation by addition of fumarate to alkane, carboxylation with inorganic carbon and other additional possible alternative mechanisms (Fig. 3).
7.1. Alkane activation by addition to fumarate

Increasing evidence indicates that addition to fumarate play a dominant role in the activation of alkanes for further degradation under anoxic conditions (Table 2 ;  Table 3). So and Young, 1999a ;  So and Young, 1999b provided some evidence linking the growth of a sulfate reducing isolate D. alkenivorans strain AK-01 to anaerobic oxidation of n-pentadecane and n-hexadecane using labeling experiments. Metabolites analysis indicated that C-even and C-odd cellular fatty acids were formed from C-even and C-odd n-alkanes in strain AK-01. Similar cellular fatty acids pattern has also been observed in strain Pnd3 ( Aeckersberg et al. 1998) and Desulfatibacillum aliphaticivorans CV2803T (Cravo-Laureau et al. 2005). In addition, strain AK-01 and strain CV2803T also produce 2-, 4-, 6- and 8-methyl branched fatty acids as well as (1-methylalkyl)succinates with chain lengths that specifically correlated with those of the parent substrates, thus indicating that n-alkanes are anaerobically activated by addition to fumarate at the sub-terminal carbon atom ( Cravo-Laureau et al., 2005 ;  Callaghan et al., 2006). A similar reaction has been reported for the nitrate-reducing strain HxN1 grown on labeled n-hexane with details about the first proposed pathway for anaerobic degradation of a straight-chain alkane ( Rabus et al. 2001; Wilkes et al., 2003 ;  Widdel et al., 2006). Briefly, addition of fumarate to n-alkane is catalyzed by a radical enzyme (the extracted hydrogen from the parent substrate is recovered) to yield (1-methylalkyl)succinate ( Fig. 3A), after which the activation metabolite undergoes a carbon skeleton rearrangement (presumably as coenzyme A thioester) to form (2-methylalkyl)malonyl-CoA that allows decarboxylation to 4-methylalkanoyl-CoA. The resulting fatty acid can then undergo a “conventional” β-oxidation to yield intermediates such as (2-methylalkyl)-CoA, a linear fatty acid containing two carbon atoms less than the parent n-alkane, propionyl-CoA and acetyl-CoA. Acetyl-CoA is further oxidized to carbon dioxide (CO2). Fumarate can be regenerated from propionyl-CoA (via methylmalonyl-CoA and succinyl-CoA) or alternatively from acetyl-CoA ( Rabus et al. 2001; Wilkes et al., 2003; Callaghan et al., 2006 ;  Widdel et al., 2006). The net reaction of alkane addition to fumarate is exergonic (ΔG°′ < 0), thus indicating that there is no needs for exogenous energy (such as ATP hydrolysis) for this reaction to proceed (Rabus et al. 2001). Similar observations were made with the formation of benzylsuccinate from toluene and fumarate (Biegert et al. 1996).

Such a reaction has also been demonstrated for the initial activation of short chain alkanes (butane and propane) in the sulfate reducing strain BuS5 and in the enrichment culture Propane60-GuB derived from marine sediments. On the basis of metabolites detected in both cultures, butane was specifically activated at the sub-terminal carbon atom to yield (1-methylpropyl)succinate and propane was activated at both the sub-terminal and at one of the terminal carbon atoms to produce isopropyl- and n-propylsuccinate ( Kniemeyer et al. 2007). Based on current knowledge, the anaerobic activation pattern of propane occurs in other sulfidogenic enrichment cultures (Savage et al. 2010) as well as in hydrocarbons-rich environments ( Duncan et al., 2009 ;  Gieg et al., 2010). Also, cyclic alkanes investigated to date are exclusively activated through addition to fumarate for further degradation under anoxic conditions ( Rios-Hernandez et al., 2003 ;  Musat et al., 2010).

The formation of alkyl- or cyclic-branched succinates as catabolic intermediates is, by analogy to the well established formation of benzylsuccinate as initial activation product of anaerobic toluene metabolism, catalyzed by strictly anaerobic glycyl radical enzymes (Widdel et al., 2006 ;  Heider, 2007). Therefore, these glycyl radical enzymes have been termed alkylsuccinate synthase or (1-methylalkyl)succinate synthase (Ass or Mas) for n-alkanes and we suggest (cycloalkyl)succinate synthase (Cas) for cycloalkanes. This is a novel class of glycyl radical enzymes affiliated to the superfamily pyruvate-formate lyase (PFL) and type III ribonucleotide reductase (RNR) ( Leuthner et al., 1998 ;  Widdel et al., 2006). The genes encoding the candidate alkylsuccinate synthase (assA or masD) have recently been identified in alkane degraders’ sulfidogenic bacteria D. alkenivorans AK-01 ( Callaghan et al. 2008) and Desulfoglaeba alkanedexens ALDCT (Callaghan et al. 2010) as well as in nitrate reducing strains HxN1 (Grundmann et al. 2008) and OcN1 (Zedelius et al. 2010), all affiliated to the Proteobacteria ( Fig. 1 ;  Fig. 2). Interestingly, assA-like genes were also detected in methanogenic octacosane (C28H58) degrading enrichment cultures; which could indicate a possible implication of fumarate in the initial activation of alkanes under methanogenic conditions (Callaghan et al. 2010).
7.2. Alkane activation via carboxylation

This second activation strategy was mainly developed from the growth pattern of the sulfidogenic strain Hxd3. On the basis of metabolite analysis, C-even and C-odd cellular fatty acids were formed from C-odd and C-even n-alkanes, respectively ( Aeckersberg et al., 1998 ;  So et al., 2003). Growth of Hxd3 with different chain lengths of non-labeled alkanes in the presence of H13CO3− resulted in the formation of fatty acids that are one carbon atom shorter than the original alkane. Furthermore, their (fatty acids) carboxyl group contains a 13C atom suggesting that H13CO3− was directly involved in the initial activation of alkanes in strain Hxd3. Therefore, strain Hxd3 would metabolize an alkane to fatty acids via carboxylation with inorganic carbon (HCO3−/CO2), most likely at C-3, with subsequent removal of two sub-terminal carbon atoms from the alkane chain (Fig. 3B). More recently, from an alkane-degrading, nitrate-reducing consortium, Callaghan et al. (2009) indicated that a carboxylation-like mechanism analogous to the activation strategy previously proposed by So et al. (2003) was the likely route for the anaerobic biodegradation of hexadecane. However, in both cases, the hypothetical fatty acid intermediate (2-ethylalkanoate) which should result from the incorporation of inorganic carbon at C-3 of the alkane has never been detected. There is an on-going debate about this initial activation mechanism. From an energetic point of view, the carboxylation of alkanes is not feasible under standard conditions (ΔG°′ = +28 kJ/mol) unless the concentration of the fatty acid (2-ethylalkanoate) is in the micromolar order of magnitude or less otherwise this reaction will not proceed under physiological conditions (Thauer and Shima 2008). The possibility of other reaction(s) preceding the carboxylation has also been proposed (So et al. 2003).
7.3. Alternative activation mechanisms

Depending on the microorganisms and electron acceptors available in a selective environment, anaerobic degradation of alkanes may proceed via alternative activation mechanisms not involving addition of fumarate or carboxylation. For instance, Pseudomonas chloritidismutans AW-1T is able to produce its own oxygen via chlorate respiration for subsequent metabolism of alkanes (Fig. 3C-1) (Mehboob et al. 2009). This would indicate the requirement for oxygenases to incorporate molecular oxygen thus generated from the dismutation of chlorite into the alkane. Such a reaction is referred to as “unusual oxygenation” of alkane since it takes place in the total exclusion of air. A similar activation strategy via “intra-cellular oxygen production” is also possible with electron acceptors such nitrate or nitrite (Ettwig et al. 2010). However, in a recent work, it was presumed that nitrite or nitric oxide generated during the reduction of nitrate may be directly involved as a co-reactant for the activation of alkanes in strain HdN1 (Fig. 3C-2) (Zedelius et al. 2010). Given that the activation metabolite of NO2− or NO co-reacting with alkanes is still unknown; this hypothesis remains to be demonstrated.

Another recently proposed strategy may involve anaerobic hydroxylation of oil alkanes (Fig. 3C-3). Pyrosequencing of total genomic DNA retrieved from methanogenic enrichment cultures degrading crude oil revealed the presence of genes encoding the β-oxidation pathway and also alcohol and aldehyde dehydrogenase genes. The absence of assA-like genes and metabolites that would have indicate an addition to the double bond of fumarate or even likely a carboxylation suggest that oil alkanes in the methanogenic enrichment culture are probably activated via anaerobic hydroxylation ( Head et al. 2010).
8. Conclusions and future perspectives

Alkanes are quantitatively the most important fraction in crude oil. The anaerobic biodegradation of alkanes, which has now been documented to occur in anoxic habitats, is of great importance for the oil industry. Today, this process remains an exciting area of investigation to understand the factors that govern the biodegradation of oil in deep-subsurface reservoirs, and for the bioremediation of oil-contaminated environments.

It is now well-established that microbial activities associated with petroleum reservoirs have led to the decrease of oil quality, making refining more costly and recovery more difficult (Head et al. 2003). Examination of deep-subsurface petroleum reservoirs has revealed the presence of live microbial communities dominated by anaerobes, therefore oil reservoirs have been referred to as “geobioreactors” in which different physiological types of anaerobic microorganisms including fermentative, syntrophic, sulfidogenic and methanogens may be responsible for the biodegradation of crude oil in situ with the preferential removal of the saturated hydrocarbon fraction ( Magot et al., 2000; Jones et al., 2008 ;  Wang et al., 2010).

Petroleum reserves have been depleted to certain levels, and anaerobic degradation is considered to be one of the major processes responsible for this phenomenon. Moreover, biogenic methane that is commonly associated with biodegraded oil reservoirs is believe to be a result of the microbial decomposition of oil alkanes (Jones et al. 2008). While methanogenic degradation of oil alkanes has significant effect on the recovery of high-value light crude oil, on the positive side, in situ methanogenic biodegradation activities may offer a route for potential alternative and innovative energy recovery strategies from existing oil reservoirs after extraction. After extensive water flooding, at least two-third of the crude oil still remains entrapped in pores within the formation, the recovery of energy from conventional reserves via in situ conversion of even a smaller fraction of the residual oil to methane gas could represent a considerable supply of energy. This is great interest because world requirements for methane are estimated to increase within the next three decades (International Energy Outlook 2009, 2010; www.eia.doe.gov/oiaf/ieo/) and methanogenic conversion of oil alkanes is seen as a future solution for world energy needs (Fig. 4).
However, there are still many questions regarding the anaerobic biodegradation of alkanes that need to be addressed. For instance, though the isolation of anaerobic microorganisms capable of utilizing alkanes has been essential for a comprehensive understanding of their role and behavior in anoxic habitats, the complex interactions within methanogenic alkane-degrading communities are still not well understood. Further research is needed to explore multidisciplinary, e.g., molecular, microbiological and chemical or geochemical, approaches to establish the key organisms, biochemical reactions and mechanisms involved in such complex associations. For instance, there is now reasonable circumstantial evidence that some fermentative bacteria such as Firmicutes might be directly implicated in the degradation of hydrocarbons. It is also worth noting that microorganisms affiliated to Firmicutes are the most commonly encountered bacterial taxon in samples retrieved from oil reservoirs ( Gray et al. 2010), hence diverse and abundant members of the Firmicutes should not only be considered as “traditional” fermentative bacteria, they could have adapted to metabolize oil components in situ and in methanogenic oil degrading enrichment cultures.

Sulfidogenic prokaryotes, however, are metabolically versatile and are able to grow either by using sulfate as electron acceptor or by syntrophic lifestyle in the absence of electron acceptor. This characteristic makes them important members of degradative microbial communities. Davidova et al. (2006) reported that Desulfoglaeba alkanexedens ALDCT is able to syntrophically degrade alkanes in co-culture with hydrogenotrophic methanogens. Interestingly, several sulfudogenic with the capacity for alkane oxidation are able to utilize thiosulfate, sulfite or elemental sulfur as electron acceptors to enhance their growth yield and rates. This is of great importance because organic sulfur compounds present in crude oils can serve as sulfur-based electron acceptors (Röling et al. 2003). The capability of T. sibiricus and related organisms to use organic substrates such alkanes without needs for exogenous electron acceptors makes them potential key players of the complex metabolic food web existing in habitats such as high temperature petroleum reservoirs ( Mardanov et al. 2009). The role of hyperthermophilic organisms such as Thermococcus sp. and Archaeglobus sp. in oil reservoirs is not well understood. Analysis of existing genomic data has started to reveal their potentiality. It is tempting to speculate that, in high temperature petroleum reservoirs; these archaeal members play a considerable role during the initial steps of the anaerobic metabolism of alkanes.

Information on the potential of biodegradation can be obtained from specific intermediates metabolites where their detection is indicative of microbial activities on a given substrate. Moreover, functional genes encoding key enzymes of specific degradation pathways can also serve as biomarkers. For instance, studies on alkylsuccinate genes by means of assA-targetd primer sets have provided evidence for the importance of novel groups of anaerobic alkane-degraders and the major role played by glycyl radical dependent addition to fumarate ( Callaghan et al. 2010). However, physiologically distinct microorganisms, e.g., strain Hxd3, utilize fumarate-independent mechanisms to activate their alkane substrates. Therefore, additional research at the genomic level will be necessary to reveal the genetic associated with these new biochemical pathways.

Finally, understanding the alkanes degrading communities with their biochemical function will significantly advance the knowledge about the organisms mediating the specialized biochemical reaction steps. This will allow us to better understand the biological processes responsible for oil biodegradation in natural environments and in petroleum reservoirs for possible biotechnological innovation and applications in utilization of the residual oils.
