Mixed aerobic and anaerobic microbial communities in benzene-contaminated groundwater
Authors

    First published: 22 December 2008Full publication history
    DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2672.2008.04005.x  View/save citation
    Cited by (CrossRef): 21 articles Check for updates 

    Present addresses
    A. Aburto, Universidad Autonoma Metropolina-Cuajimalpa, Mexico, DF, CP01120.

    F. Coulon, Centre for Resource Management and Efficiency, Sustainable Systems Department, School of Applied Sciences, Cranfield University, Cranfield, UK.

    A. S. Ball School of Biological Sciences, Flinders University of South Australia, Adelaide, SA, Australia.

Arturo Aburto, Department of Biological Sciences, University of Essex, Colchester CO4 3SQ, UK. E-mail: aaburto@correo.cua.uam.mx
Abstract

Aims:  To investigate the factors affecting benzene biodegradation and microbial community composition in a contaminated aquifer.

Methods and Results:  We identified the microbial community in groundwater samples from a benzene-contaminated aquifer situated below a petrochemical plant. Eleven out of twelve groundwater samples with in situ dissolved oxygen concentrations between 0 and 2·57 mg l−1 showed benzene degradation in aerobic microcosm experiments, whereas no degradation in anaerobic microcosms was observed. The lack of aerobic degradation in the remaining microcosm could be attributed to a pH of 12·1. Three groundwaters, examined by 16S rRNA gene clone libraries, with low in situ oxygen concentrations and high benzene levels, each had a different dominant aerobic (or denitrifying) population, either Pseudomonas, Polaromonas or Acidovorax species. These groundwaters also had syntrophic organisms, and aceticlastic methanogens were detected in two samples. The alkaline groundwater was dominated by organisms closely related to Hydrogenophaga.

Conclusions:  Results show that pH 12·1 is inimical to benzene biodegradation, and that oxygen concentrations below 0·03 mg l−1 can support aerobic benzene-degrading communities.

Significance and Impact of the Study:  These findings will help to guide the treatment of contaminated groundwaters, and raise questions about the extent to which aerobes and anaerobes may interact to effect benzene degradation.
Introduction

Benzene is derived from fossil fuels, particularly petroleum, and reforming of straight-chain alkanes, as well as from incomplete combustion in volcanoes, cigarette smoke and forest fires, and is a ubiquitous highly toxic and carcinogenic organic environmental pollutant. It is both highly volatile (vapour pressure of 56 mmHg at 12°C) and relatively soluble in water (∼1·6 g l−1 at the temperature of UK groundwaters, 12°C), and so disperses readily in air and water, creating a global threat to watercourses and drinking water supplies, with some 110 tonnes released into UK waters alone in 2001 (Environment Agency 2004), so there is an urgent need to understand its fate in the environment. Microbes – particularly aerobic microbes – able to degrade benzene are readily isolated from water and soil. In subterranean environments where volatilization is minimal, the primary means of benzene attenuation is microbial biodegradation. However, as well as serving as a carbon source for some microbes, benzene creates a toxic and stressful environment for all organisms, and there is presently only fragmented information on the efficacy of microbial degradation in the removal of this pollutant from contaminated sites.

Here we investigate groundwater beneath the Site for Innovative Research in Natural Attenuation (SIReN), where petrochemical processing over decades has left a legacy of hydrocarbon pollutants, most notably benzene. We have previously shown that microbial community compositions of groundwater samples from several different uncontaminated wells were similar, whereas those of benzene-contaminated groundwaters, sampled from different wells, were very different from each other and were less diverse (Fahy et al. 2005). It was concluded, on the basis of correspondence analysis of microbial communities and physicochemical parameters, that change in redox conditions driven by benzene oxidation, rather than benzene stress/toxicity, was the principal parameter shaping the composition of microbial communities of benzene-contaminated groundwaters (Fahy et al. 2005). It was also shown that aerobic benzene-degrading bacteria could be enriched from contaminated groundwaters with very low in situ oxygen concentrations, and T-RFLP experiments hinted that typically aerobic microbes were relatively abundant in situ (Fahy et al. 2006).

In order to test this idea, in the present study we analysed the in situ microbial communities in four benzene-contaminated groundwaters by bacterial and archaeal 16S RNA gene clone libraries, and examined the potential for anaerobic as well as aerobic benzene degradation. We found phylotypes typical of both aerobic and anaerobic microbes in heavily contaminated groundwaters, and conclude that oxygen, even at low concentrations, plays an important role in the natural attenuation process by initiating benzene biodegradation, but that anaerobes may also be involved in degradation, using a variety of other terminal electron acceptors. Furthermore, we found that at pH 12 no benzene degradation was detectable. These findings have significant consequences for pollution management decisions, in particular whether to exploit natural attenuation or to use intervention strategies.
Materials and methods
Site description and sampling

This study of hydrocarbon-contaminated groundwater from the SIReN focuses on 12 wells showing different physicochemical characteristics and levels of contamination nominally classified as high, low or clean (Table 1). A detailed description of the site was reported previously (Jones et al. 2001; Fahy et al. 2005), and the relative position of the groundwater samples is indicated in Fig. 1.

Groundwater was sampled on 15 April 2003. Samples DW3s, 308s, W18s, VP13i and W18d were collected with a peristaltic pump, while a bladder type pump was used for DW3d, W6i, 308i, W18i, 309d, 309i and 309s (see Table 1 for details). Groundwater was flushed from wells until the pH, temperature, conductivity and dissolved oxygen concentrations were stable. Samples were collected in sterile 2-l glass bottles. For samples destined for anaerobic cultivation, bottles were flushed with nitrogen prior to and during filling; all the bottles were filled to the brim and sealed with polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) lined thick rubber stoppers. Then they were immediately refrigerated and protected from light. For DNA extraction, groundwater was filtered on site with a hand-powered pump, and micro-organisms were collected on 0·2 μm pore size membrane filters (Durapore, 3M). The filters were placed in guanidinum thiocyanate buffer (Boom et al. 1990) and kept at 4°C until required.
Microcosms and benzene monitoring

Anaerobic microcosms were prepared in triplicate in an anaerobic cabinet, by dispensing 50 ml of groundwater into 110 ml serum bottles that were crimp-sealed with thick butyl stoppers. The bottles were aseptically evacuated and flushed with nitrogen, leaving approximately 1·4 bars overpressure. They were then spiked with benzene to give a concentration of 64 mg l−1 plus the concentration already present (i.e. if a groundwater sample had 10 mg l−1 of benzene, after spiking it would have 74 mg l−1), and incubated at 12°C (representing the in situ temperature) in the dark for 537 days. Aerobic microcosms were prepared by dispensing 18 ml of the groundwater into 110 ml serum bottles, spiking with benzene to give a concentration of 80 mg l−1 plus the concentration already present, and crimp-sealing with PTFE-lined silicone septa. The amount of oxygen in this volume of headspace had previously been shown to be sufficient to allow complete aerobic degradation of benzene at this concentration without depletion of oxygen (Fahy 2003).

Gas chromatography was used to measure the benzene concentration in microcosms with a Unicam 610 Series GC fitted with a 4 mm internal diameter, glass packed column (10% apiezon on chromosorb W) and a flame ionization detector (FID). The temperatures were at the injector 250°C, column 155°C and detector 250°C, and detection was set at medium sensitivity. Hydrogen was used as carrier gas at a flow rate of 1·0 ml min−1. Autoclaved microcosms were used as controls throughout the experiment. Standards and controls all had the same liquid/headspace ratio, and were held at the same temperature as the test samples.
Hydrocarbon analyses

The extraction procedure and GC-MS analysis settings have been previously described (Coulon et al. 2007). Briefly, 20 ml of sample was extracted with solid phase extraction tubes (SPE Supelclean EnviTM-18; Supelco, Bellefonte, PA, USA) and eluted with a mixture of hexane: dichloromethane (1 : 1). Extracts were diluted to appropriate concentrations for gas chromatography analysis. Deuterated alkanes and polyaromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) served as internal standards and were added to the extracts at 0·5 and 0·4 μg ml−1, respectively. The quantification was carried out by GC-MS using a Thermo Trace gas chromatograph coupled to a DSQ mass spectrometer operated at 70 eV in positive ion mode. Chromatography was performed with a fused silica capillary column (30 × 0·25 mm internal diameter) coated with RTX-5MS (0·25 μm film thickness; Restek Corporation, Sounderton, UK) with helium as the carrier gas. A sample volume of 1 μl was applied in splitless injection mode. The oven temperature was programmed at 85°C for 2 min and then increased to 310°C at 20°C min−1 and held at this temperature for 30 min. The mass spectrometer used the full scan mode (range m/z 50–650) for quantitative analysis of target saturated hydrocarbons and PAHs. Quantification was performed by integrating the peak at specific m/z for each compound. External multilevel calibrations were carried out for both alkanes and PAHs quantification ranging from 0·005 to 0·5 ng μl−1, respectively. For quality control, a 1·0 ng μl−1 diesel standard solution (ASTM C12–C60 quantitative, Supelco) and a 1·0 ng μl−1 PAH Mix Standard solution (Supelco) were analysed every 12 samples. The variation of the reproducibility of extraction and quantification of samples were determined by successive extractions and injections (n = 8) of the same sample and estimated to be ± 10%.
DNA extraction and PCR

Microbial community DNA was extracted directly from the groundwater as previously described (Fahy et al. 2005). The method involved the use of a guanidinium thiocyanate lysis buffer (Boom et al. 1990). PCR targeting the 16S rRNA gene was performed with the following primers from Invitrogen (Carlsbad, CA, USA): 27F (TCT GGT TGA TCC CGC CAG) and 1392R (ACG GGC GGT GTG TAC) (Lane 1991) for members of the Archaea, and 63F (CAG GCC TAA CAC ATG CAA GTC) and 1389R (ACG GGC GGT GTG TAC AAG) (Marchesi et al. 1998) for the Bacteria. The cycling conditions were as follows: an initial denaturation step of 94°C for 2 min, followed by 30 cycles of denaturation at 94°C for 1 min, annealing at 55°C for 1 min, and extension at 72°C for 2 min. Cycling was completed by a final elongation at 72°C for 10 min.
Cloning and sequencing

PCR products were cloned with a TOPO TA cloning kit (Invitrogen), as described in the manufacturer’s instructions using One Shot TOP10 chemically competent E. coli cells. White colonies were selected from LB agar plates containing ampicillin (50 μg ml−1) and X-Gal (20 μg ml−1). The screening of inserts from transformants was performed by direct PCR amplification from colonies using primers M13 forward (GAC GTT GTA AAA CGA CGG CCA G) and M13 reverse (CAC AGG AAA CAG CTA TGA CCA TG). Heating at 94°C for 10 min preceded standard cycling conditions (see above). Amplified inserts were grouped on the basis of restriction fragment length polymorphism (RFLP) patterns using a combination of the two restriction endonucleases CfoI and AluI (Sigma) at 37°C for 2·5 h. Representative clones of each RFLP group were sequenced, giving between 50 and 72 sequenced clones per groundwater sample.

Sequencing reactions contained 1 μl of 10 pmol μl−1 of the reverse primer 1389R (Invitrogen), 2 μl of Big Dye Terminator V2·0 Cycle Sequencing kit, 6 μl of 2·5 × sequencing buffer, 5 μl of purified PCR product, and 6 μl of water. Amplification conditions were: 25 cycles of (96°C, 15 s; 60°C, 15 s; 60°C, 4 min). After sodium acetate and ethanol precipitation, the sequencing reaction products were run on a Perkin Elmer ABI PRISM 310 capillary electrophoresis automated genetic analyser. Sequences were then processed with DNA Sequencing Analysis Software version 3.3.
Phylogenetic analyses

The sequences obtained in this study were compared with the European Bioinformatics Institutes database by online FastA searches (Pearson and Lipman 1988) and to the Check Chimera programme (Cole et al. 2003). The profile alignment technique of ClustalW (Thompson et al. 1994) was used to obtain preliminary alignments that were manually refined in GeneDoc Multiple Sequence Alignment Editor ver. 2.6.002 (Nicholas and Nicholas 1997) taking account of secondary structure. Phylogenetic analyses were performed with the Phylip software package (Felsenstein 2001), using the Jukes–Cantor distance and the neighbour-joining methods. Significance of the branching order was determined by bootstrap analysis with 1000 re-sampled data sets.
Results
Physicochemical characteristics of the groundwater samples

Benzene was the main pollutant in the 12 groundwater samples from the SIReN (Table 1), as previously observed (Jones et al. 2001; Fahy et al. 2005, 2006). Generally, toluene, ethylbenzene and xylene concentrations were about 20 times lower than that of benzene, with the notable exception of well VP13i in which toluene was the main contaminant. The concentrations of n-alkanes and PAHs were around 1000-fold lower than that of benzene (Table 1), and so were not considered in this study. Benzene was the main carbon and energy source (and stressor) in the groundwaters being studied, and therefore primarily responsible for affecting the microbial community composition, particularly in those groundwaters investigated by clone-library analysis.
Benzene biodegradation

Added benzene was metabolized to below detection level (1 μg l−1) in 10 of the 12 groundwater sample microcosms incubated aerobically (Fig. 2). Rapid degradation was observed in several samples characterized by either very low in situ oxygen concentrations (wells 309d, 309s and 308i), or no measurable benzene contamination prior to spiking (W18s) (Fig. 2; Table 1). By contrast, slow degradation occurred in the most polluted and oxygen-limited samples (DW3d and W18i). Partial degradation occurred in groundwater W18i over the 15 month incubation period (data not shown), while no degradation was registered in the highly alkaline groundwater, W18d (Fig. 2). No degradation was observed in groundwater microcosms incubated under anaerobic conditions for 537 days, even after the addition of nutrients (NH4Cl to a final concentration of 3 g l−1 and KH2PO4 to a final concentration of 5 g l−1) and electron acceptors added separately (nitrate, sulfate and iron) at day 240. Independent experiments to enrich methanogens also resulted in no growth (data not shown).

Groundwater microbial communities

In order to gain further insights into these laboratory observations in which 11 out of 12 groundwater microcosms degraded benzene aerobically while none degraded it anaerobically, we examined historical groundwater data detailing potential terminal electron acceptors and products of anaerobic metabolism (Jones et al. 2001), and selected four groundwater samples (summarized in Table 2) for 16S rRNA gene microbial community analysis. Groundwater sample W18d was chosen because of its high pH of 12·1, the presence of relatively high oxygen concentrations in situ, and the lack of degradation under both aerobic and anaerobic conditions. Sample W18i, which overlies groundwater W18d by 8 m, was the most benzene-contaminated groundwater, contained no detectable oxygen, but had the capacity to degrade benzene aerobically. Groundwater 309d was located in the deeper sandstone aquifer, whereas all the other samples were from unconsolidated sand and gravel overlying the clay aquitard. It had a very low oxygen concentration in situ (0·02 mg l−1) but supported rapid and complete aerobic degradation of added benzene; it also had a high concentration of methane (22·8 mg l−1) (Table 2). A similarly high level of methane was seen in groundwater DW3d, and the potential intermediate of anaerobic benzene degradation, phenol, was also detected (Table 2).

16S rRNA gene PCR amplicons were obtained from all four samples using bacterial primers, and the main phylogenetic groups are summarized in Fig. 3. Archaeal primers however only yielded amplicons from samples DW3d and 309d. These amplicons had sequences of methanogens, reflecting the fact that both of these groundwaters had high methane concentrations (Table 2). In groundwater DW3d, a total of 20 archaeal clones (AM491928-35) out of 27 formed a distinct cluster within the Methanosaetaceae (Fig. 4). The cloned sequences were generally 95–98% similar to their closest cultivated relative Methanosaeta concilii, however all were more similar to non-cultured organisms (e.g. from oil-contaminated groundwater or from a consortium capable of trichlorobenzene degradation). The remaining seven clone sequences (AM946544-45) were more than 95% similar to methanogens belonging to the Methanomicrobiaceae from a toluene-degrading methanogenic consortium (Ficker et al. 1999). The Bacteria in DW3d were more diverse than the Archaea and were dominated by the Betaproteobacteria (27 out of 51 clones; Figs 3 and 5). Within this class, 14 clones (AM491921-22) were related to Polaromonas naphthalenivorans with more than 95% 16S rRNA sequence similarity. Other organisms were related to Rhodoferax ferrireducens (93·1–96% similarity) and to Bacteroidetes strains (AM990338, AM999987) in a consortium mineralizing benzene under sulfate-reducing conditions.

The aceticlastic methanogenic Archaea in the deeper sandstone groundwater (309d) and the sand–gravel groundwater (DW3d) were very similar. By contrast, the predominant Bacteria in each were different, with the sandstone groundwater being dominated by the Gammaproteobacteria (Figs 3 and 6), mostly Pseudomonas species (38 out of 72 cloned sequences) (AM946149-52) rather than Betaproteobacteria.

The most abundant phylogenetic group of Bacteria in the most contaminated groundwater (W18i) was the Betaproteobacteria (Figs 3 and 5). Some of the organisms detected in W18i were similar to uncultured micro-organisms from diverse environments, such as a reactor system treating monochlorobenzene (13 clones, AM491926), a petroleum-contaminated groundwater (8 clones, AM491925), and an isolate, Acidovorax strain P51, that can degrade chlorinated benzenes (6 clones, AM948962). Nine Bacteroidetes clones have close affiliation with a benzene-degrading sulphidogenic consortium, while 10 clones had 98·7% 16S rRNA sequence similarity to clones from benzene-contaminated groundwater (AY214176) that were very similar to Rhodoferax ferrireducens (as in DW3d).

The highly alkaline groundwater sample (W18d) was, like DW3d and W18i, dominated by the Betaproteobacteria, though the closest cultivated relative to 22 out of 50 clones (AM491917) was the Hydrogenophaga strain YED1. However, these clones were more similar to environmental clones from a very alkaline groundwater, not known to be contaminated with hydrocarbons. One isolate with a high 16S rRNA sequence similarity to the dominant clone was obtained from well W18d, but this could not degrade benzene under the experimental conditions employed (AM980998).
Discussion

Three of the four wells that were investigated in detail have very low in situ oxygen concentrations (0–0·03 mg l−1), yet have the capacity for aerobic benzene biodegradation and harbour a mix of aerobic and anaerobic microbes. In each well the dominant aerobic (or denitrifying) population was different, but there were many similarities between the anaerobic populations. Oxygen is a key reactant in the crucial first step of opening the benzene ring; moreover aerobic benzene-degrading microbes gain more energy by using oxygen as the terminal electron acceptor compared with other typical electron acceptors. Therefore, aerobic benzene degradation is widespread and can occur rapidly. Nevertheless, benzene can be degraded under anaerobic conditions using a range of potential ring-opening mechanisms and with a wide variety of terminal electron acceptors, such as nitrate (Burland and Edwards 1999), chlorate (Weelink et al. 2007), iron (Lovley et al. 1994), manganese (Villatoro-Monzón et al. 2003), sulfate (Lovley et al. 1995) and under methanogenic conditions (Grbić-Galić and Vogel 1987), and even by pure cultures (Coates et al. 2001; Kasai et al. 2006). However, anaerobic benzene degradation is frequently much slower (Kazumi et al. 1997) and in many cases has been reported not to occur (Acton and Barker 1992; Barbaro et al. 1992; Kazumi et al. 1997).

In the SIReN there is evidence that in situ anaerobic micro-organisms are involved in benzene degradation because many clones were closely related to those found in anaerobic aromatic-hydrocarbon-degrading consortia, and also by the detection of catabolic intermediates such as phenol, as well as methane production. However, there was no evidence of anaerobic degradation in laboratory microcosms in which strict anaerobic conditions were maintained, suggesting that continuous flow or periodic refreshment of the groundwater with oxygen may be important for in situ benzene degradation.

There is strong evidence that the most abundant aerobic micro-organisms detected in clone libraries are benzene degraders, for example: (1) they are from genera typically associated with degradation of aromatic hydrocarbons in freshwater environments – indeed the clones related to Polaromonas naphthalenivorans were identical (on the basis of 16S rRNA similarity) to a clone demonstrated by stable-isotope probing to derive from an organism catabolizing naphthalene (Jeon et al. 2003); (2) benzene was the main source of carbon and energy in groundwater samples; (3) clones detected in situ in this study were very similar to those selectively enriched in aerobic benzene-degrading microcosms (Hydrogenophaga sp., Pseudomonas sp., and Rhodococcus erythropolis) in the study by Fahy et al. (2006); and (4) we have isolated some strains very closely related to the predominant clones and shown that they degrade benzene aerobically (Fahy et al. 2008).

An important question that arises is whether the in situ concentrations of dissolved oxygen are sufficient to support degradation of benzene. Benzene biodegradation has previously been shown to occur microaerophilically at 0·05 mg l−1 of oxygen (Yerushalmi et al. 2001), with catechol, benzoate and phenol detected as intermediates. It is therefore not unreasonable to assume that it can occur at 0·03 mg l−1 or that there are periods of time when, or locations where, oxygen concentrations exceed those measured in this study.

There are several scenarios that could explain our findings. Benzene mineralization could occur in series, with facultative microaerophiles (like the predominant Pseudomonas or Polaromonas species) being responsible for ring-opening, and anaerobes benefiting from the local removal of oxygen and metabolizing oxidation products like catechol, benzoate or phenol that are more readily degraded than benzene. Alternatively, parallel anaerobic and aerobic processes could be occurring, as there will be regions of anoxia and areas where more oxygen is present in the heterogeneous sandy sediments, owing to localized microbial activity, formation of biofilms and differential compaction of sediments. Although other BTEX compounds are at least an order of magnitude less abundant than benzene in the four groundwaters, it is possible that some of the anaerobic microbes found in clone libraries are involved in their degradation, because methyl- and ethyl-substituted benzenes are more readily degraded than benzene under anaerobic conditions.

The close co-existence of aerobes and anaerobes is not only possible in a heterogeneous environment such as an aquifer (Bakermans and Madsen 2002; Bakermans et al. 2002), but has been shown to occur in liquid culture (Wimpenny and Abdollahi 1991; Gerritse and Gottschal 1993). For example, the strict aerobe, Comamonas testosteroni, and strict anaerobe, Methanosarcina barkeri, grew together, with the aerobe consuming the oxygen that was supplied at a very low level, maintaining it below the concentration that was inhibitory to the methanogen (Gerritse and Gottschal 1993). The stable co-existence of such metabolically diverse species in low-oxygen-concentration chemostat cultures has parallels with the situation in groundwater DW3d (with a net dissolved oxygen concentration of 0·03 mg l−1), where strictly anaerobic methanogens live alongside aerobic members of the Comamonadaceae. The most abundant clones were very similar to the aerobe Polaromonas naphthalenivorans (Comamonadaceae), while the main Archaea were aceticlastic methanogens, closely related to those considered to play a role in anaerobic degradation of hydrocarbons, for example in a crude oil storage cavity (Watanabe et al. 2002) and a hydrocarbon-contaminated aquifer (Dojka et al. 1998). Moreover, in groundwater DW3d, two clones most closely related to syntrophic bacteria (Syntrophus spp.) from a methanogenic alkane-degrading consortium (Zengler et al. 1999), and seven clones similar to members of the Bacteroidetes from a benzene-mineralizing anaerobic consortium (Phelps et al. 1998), are implicated as a possible link in the carbon and energy flow from primary degraders to the aceticlastic methanogens (Grbić-Galić and Vogel 1987; Kazumi et al. 1997; Dojka et al. 1998; Weiner and Lovley 1998; Zengler et al. 1999; Caldwell and Suflita 2000; Grabowski et al. 2005). Groundwater DW3d, therefore, has the necessary microbial components for serial or parallel aerobic–anaerobic degradation of benzene.

The possible role of anaerobes other than aceticlastic methanogens should also be considered, but more tentatively, owing to more distant relationships and a less certain phylogeny–physiology connection. For example, several clones related to the facultative iron-reducer Rhodoferax ferrireducens (Finneran et al. 2003) were identified that have been seen in hydrocarbon-contaminated environments. Interestingly, Fahy et al. (2006) noted that Rhodoferax sp. was dominant in a SIReN groundwater sample (308S), but after aerobic incubation it could no longer be detected, suggesting that in situ it is either anaerobic or microaerophilic.

Parallels can be drawn with groundwater DW3d discussed above and 309d, the groundwater in the deeper consolidated sandstone aquifer. Both have methanogenic populations and high levels of methane, and both have aerobic bacterial populations. In the case of 309d these are primarily pseudomonads, renowned for their ability to degrade aromatic hydrocarbons under aerobic, microaerophilic and nitrate-reducing conditions.

The abundance in well W18i of clones related to facultative denitrifers, e.g. Acidovorax species, similarly suggests that degradation of aromatic compounds could be coupled to aerobic respiration or nitrate reduction. Fahy et al. (2006) observed abundant Acidovorax species in an aerobic benzene-degrading microcosm, and we have also shown that they incorporate labelled carbon from 13C-benzene into their DNA (Aburto 2007), demonstrating that the dominant microbes in groundwater W18i can degrade benzene aerobically. Combined use of oxygen and nitrate should also be considered, in which oxygen is incorporated into the ring structure of the aromatic compound using mono-oxygenases, but nitrate is the electron acceptor (Major et al. 1988). Faster benzene biodegradation in the presence of both oxygen and nitrate than with oxygen or nitrate alone in batch cultures have been observed elsewhere (Major et al. 1988; Alvarez and Vogel 1991). However, the nitrate concentration reported in the well W18i is below the limit of detection of 1 mg l−1, and no oxygen was detected. But it should be noted that the highly alkaline well W18d, which lies 8 m below W18i has a nitrate and oxygen concentration of 2·1 and 2·57 mg l–1, respectively. While in the uncontaminated well W18s, which lies just 3 m above W18i, there is a nitrate and oxygen concentration of 2·7 and 2·22 mg l−1, respectively. This implies a rather narrow benzene plume, and the possibility of a slow but steady supply of one or both of these terminal electron acceptors (and reactants in the case of oxygen), albeit at low concentrations, to the groundwater around well W18i. Accurate data on groundwater flow and benzene plume distribution would help to address this question.

Many factors other than oxygen availability affect benzene degradation. The highly alkaline groundwater sample W18d, for example, has relatively high levels of dissolved oxygen (2·57 mg l−1), but it is the only sample in which benzene degradation has not been demonstrated in the laboratory. It is also probable that there is no benzene degradation in situ, because oxidation of benzene would result in a much greater depletion of oxygen as seen in similarly contaminated wells. Furthermore, the dominant microbe is a Hydrogenophaga species that has 98·5% 16S rRNA sequence similarity to the most abundant clone sequences from a shallow aquifer in the US that is also very alkaline (pH 12·8) (Roadcap et al. 2005), but which is not known to be contaminated with benzene, suggesting that the dominant organism in well W18d is a high-pH specialist rather than a benzene specialist. Moreover, an isolated representative of this Hydrogenophaga (strain Pd1, AM980998) did not degrade benzene (data not shown).

We conclude that very low concentrations of oxygen are sufficient to allow in-situ biodegradation of benzene in the SIReN, possibly by co-operation between aerobes and anaerobes. Addition of oxygen, or oxygen-yielding compounds, would accelerate biodegradation, but is extremely expensive to engineer owing to inter alia poor solubility. Supplementation with highly soluble nitrate as a terminal electron acceptor could be considered owing to the presence of typical denitrifying organisms in some groundwater samples, but on its own may upset any oxygen-nitrate balance required for efficient benzene degradation. It is also clear that a pH of about 12 is incompatible with benzene biodegradation, and so in order to remediate groundwater in the local vicinity of the alkaline well neutralization would first be required.
