Microbial communities in different soil types do not converge after diesel contamination
Authors

    First published: 21 January 2002Full publication history
    DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-2672.2002.01528.x  View/save citation
    Cited by (CrossRef): 54 articles Check for updates 

J.G. Bundy Imperial College of Science, Technology and Medicine, Biological Chemistry, Biomedical Sciences Division, Sir Alexander Fleming Building, South Kensington, London SW7 2AZ, UK (e-mail: j.bundy@ic.ac.uk).
Abstract

Aims: To study the comparative effect of diesel addition and simulated bioremediation on the microbial community in three different soil types.

Methods and Results: Three different soils were amended with diesel and bioremediation treatment simulated by addition of nutrients. The progress of bioremediation, and the effect on the indigenous microbial communities, was monitored using microbiological techniques. These included basal respiration, sole carbon source utilization patterns using both a commercially-available substrate set and a set designed to highlight changes in hydrocarbon-utilizing bacteria, and phospholipid fatty acid (PLFA) profiling. The development of active hydrocarbon-degrading communities was indicated by the disappearance of diesel, increases in soil respiration and biomass, and large changes in the sole carbon source utilization patterns and PLFA profiles compared with control soils. However, comparison of the relative community structure of the three soils using PLFA profiling showed that there was no tendency for the community structure of the three different soil types to converge as a result of contamination. In fact, they became more dissimilar as a result. Changes in the sole carbon source utilization patterns using the commercially-available set of carbon sources indicated the same result as shown by PLFA profiling. The specially selected set of carbon sources yielded no additional information compared with the commercially-available set.

Conclusions: Diesel contamination does not result in the development of similar community profiles in different soil types.

Significance and Impact of the Study: The results suggest that different soils have different inherent microbial potential to degrade hydrocarbons, a finding that should be taken into account in impact and risk assessments. Following the development of the microbial community and its recovery is a useful and sensitive way of monitoring the impact and recovery of oil-contaminated soils.
INTRODUCTION

Contamination of soil by oil spills is a widespread environmental problem that often requires clean-up of the contaminated site (Whittaker et al. 1995). Bioremediation, the removal of hydrocarbons through microbial degradation, is a commonly used approach for decontaminating oil-polluted soils. It has often been recorded that the addition of hydrocarbon-degrading microbes is no more effective at hydrocarbon removal than is stimulating the growth of the indigenous microbiota (Atlas and Atlas 1991; Atlas and Cerniglia 1995), and may even be less effective (Radwan et al. 1997). Consequently, understanding the microbial ecology and the constraints on biodegradation of an oil-contaminated site is extremely important (Holden and Firestone 1997). A central question is therefore what is the impact of oil pollution on microbial populations?

Contamination by oil is generally expected to reduce the biodiversity of the soil microbiota (Atlas et al. 1991). A probable explanation for this is that the addition of large amounts of hydrocarbons selects for a limited number of fast-growing hydrocarbon degraders, which are enriched in the (typically oligotrophic) soil environment under these conditions. However, there is a lack of information on how this may be modulated by differing complex environmental matrices, and in particular, how different soil types may affect the development of hydrocarbon-degrading populations. Previous microcosm studies examining the effect of oil contamination on soil microbial communities have focused on a single soil type (e.g. Engelen et al. 1998; Macnaughton et al. 1999). Wünsche et al. (1995) compared hydrocarbon contamination in two different soil types. However, as one was an historically contaminated refinery soil and one was a contaminated pristine arable soil, it was not possible to separate the effects of soil type and differing oil treatment. It has been shown that even a simple measure of microbial response to oil contamination, such as a toxicity bioassay, gives different responses in different soil types (Marwood et al. 1998) and hence, it is important to determine how soil type affects community-level response.

Three different soils were chosen to represent three different environmental matrices and initial microbial communities. The soils were all of similar texture (sandy loam or loamy sand) and pH, so there were no gross effects caused by large differences in particle size distribution or pH. Two community-level techniques were selected to monitor the progress of bioremediation. Biolog plates are designed for identification of isolates of bacteria of clinical importance. Each well of a microtitre plate contains a different carbon source, together with a redox dye for indicating bacterial activity. A bacterial suspension is inoculated into every well on the plate, incubated, and the absorbance in each well read, giving a metabolic profile of the organism under test (Bochner 1989). Biolog plates were first employed to produce community-level physiological profiles (CLPPs) by Garland and Mills (1991), who inoculated an entire bacterial community, rather than single isolates, and analysed the resulting data using multivariate methods. Sole carbon source utilization profiling of microbial communities using the Biolog system is likely to be particularly sensitive to changes caused by addition of carbon, such as diesel oil, as this will result in the enrichment of fast-growing culturable bacteria (Kozdrój and Van Elsas 2000). In addition to the standard GN plates, a set of carbon sources relevant to hydrocarbon degradation was used in order to determine whether this would improve the sensitivity or selectivity of the sole carbon source utilization profiling. Previous work has shown that addition of ecologically-relevant carbon sources to Biolog GN sources can improve the discrimination between microbial communities (Campbell et al. 1997). Secondly, phospholipid fatty acid (PLFA) profiling of the microbial community using phospholipids extracted directly from the soil is a well characterized technique for providing information on the microbial community structure that is not based on culturing of microbes (Tunlid and White 1992; Zelles 1999).

The aim of the experiment was to test the hypothesis that diesel contamination would alter the microbial community of three different soils, such that they would become more similar by selecting for a limited community of fast-growing hydrocarbon degraders. A secondary hypothesis was that sole carbon source utilization profiling using Biolog plates would be particularly sensitive to oil contamination, and that the use of ecologically-relevant carbon sources would improve the performance of the Biolog approach.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Experimental design

Approximately 60 g wet weight of soil was placed without packing into a 250 ml soil jar and the jar sealed with stretched Parafilm. The jars were incubated at 25°C in the dark. Triplicate microcosms were destructively sampled at each time point. There were four sampling dates, hence 72 microcosms in total were used. Microcosms were arranged in a random order, and rearranged every 2–3 weeks throughout the duration of the experiment. Sampling dates were after 1, 27, 62 and 103 days. Upon sampling, the soil within each jar was mixed and portions of soil were then used for: Biolog CLPP (10 g soil), PLFA analysis (10 g), respiration and water content (20 g), pH (5 g), and TPH (total petroleum hydrocarbons; 10 g).
Diesel and soil properties

Standard commercial-grade diesel was purchased from a local supplier and used without modification. All soil samples were taken from grassland sites with no known history of petroleum product contamination. A single large core was collected for each soil type from the A horizon, not including the surface litter layer. Field-moist soil was sieved to a diameter of 5 mm through a stainless steel sieve and stored at 4°C until use. Soils and soil characteristics are listed in Table 1 and were measured using standard techniques.

Spiking and nutrient addition

Moist soil, at approximately 40% of water holding capacity (WHC), was contaminated by manual mixing with the diesel. The soil was spread evenly and thinly in a large glass dish; the oil was poured evenly over the surface, then mixed with a stainless steel spatula for 5 min. Oil was added at a level of 20 g kg–1 dry weight of soil (2%). This is of a similar level to concentrations used in many microcosm studies (e.g. Wünsche et al. 1995), and it is common for authentically-contaminated soils to have similar or higher oil concentrations (e.g. Saterbak et al. 1999). Nutrient solution was then poured evenly over the soil; additional water was added to bring the final moisture content of each soil to 55% of WHC. The soil was then mixed for a further 5 min. The nutrient solution contained NH4NO3 as the nitrogen source and phosphorus as a K2HPO4/KH2PO4 buffer solution with a pH of 6·4. The final solution contained 28·0 g N l–1 and 3·10 g P l–1, resulting in a final oil : N : P ratio of 100 : 10 : 1 (approximate C : N : P ratio 100 : 12 : 1·25). These are typical values for nutrient-amended bioremediation (Crawford and Crawford 1999).
Respiration

Soil respiration was measured by monitoring CO2 evolution over a 6 h period using a GC equipped with a packed column and thermal conductivity detector (Perkin Elmer, Beaconsfield, UK). Respiration was expressed as evolved CO2 in units of nmol h–1 g–1 (soil dry weight basis; see Bååth et al. (1998) for full details).
Commuity-level physiological profiling

Standard Biolog GN plates were used (Biolog Inc., Hayward, CA, US). A specially-selected set of carbon sources was also tested using MT plates which contain redox dye and micronutrients but no carbon source. Carboxylic acids rather than hydrocarbons were chosen as additional carbon sources because they are less volatile and more water-soluble than the parent hydrocarbons. MT plates were made up containing the following carbon sources: caproic acid, capric acid, myristic acid, stearic acid, behenic acid, benzoic acid, salicylic acid, protocatechuic acid, 4-hydroxybenzoic acid, 4-toluic acid, 1-naphthoic acid, 2-naphthoic acid, 2,3-dihydroxynaphthalene, 1,10-dicarboxylic acid decane, cyclohexane carboxylic acid, (±)2-ethylhexanoic acid, sodium caprylate, sodium laurate and sodium salicylate. Glucose was also included as a positive control. Compounds were made up as 15 mmol l–1 solutions in either ethanol or 70% ethanol. A 3 μg aliquot of compound was added to a well. The plates were then left to dry in a sterile environment, and stored at 4°C until use. Each plate contained four × (20 substrates + four blank wells), i.e. four replicates per MT plate.
Inoculating plates

Extraction of soil bacteria was based upon published procedures which have been shown to be effective (Faegri et al. 1977; Bååth 1992). A 10 g soil sample (wet weight) was added to 100 ml deionized water in 250 ml conical flasks and shaken for 10 min on a wrist-action shaker. Two tenfold serial dilutions were then made (5 ml+ 45 ml) of the aqueous extract. The second dilution (50 ml; 10–4 concentration) was then centrifuged at 100 g for 10 min. This low-speed centrifugation was recommended by Riis et al. (1998), who compared different methods of extracting micro-organisms from soil. The supernatant fluid (150 μl) was added to each well of a Biolog GN and MT plate. Absorbance of the wells at 590 nm was read using an automated plate reader (VMAX Molecular Devices, Crawley, UK). The plates were then sealed inside a plastic bag, incubated at 25°C in the dark, and read every 24 h over a period of 7 days. The 0 h data were subtracted from each subsequent time point in order to remove the background absorbance of the soil extract plus carbon source; the background was particularly high for the MT carbon sources. The average absorbance (average well colour development, AWCD) was then calculated for each plate and plotted against time to give AWCD curves. The incubation time data with AWCD closest to 1·00 were chosen for final data analysis, and normalized by dividing the absorbance of each well on a plate by the AWCD of that plate. The values for wells with no C source were removed and the data analysed by principal components analysis (PCA) using the covariance matrix.
PLFA analysis

Soil samples (approximately 10 g wet weight) were frozen and stored at –20°C. All samples were then analysed simultaneously at the end of the experiment. PLFAs were extracted and analysed as described previously, using a modified Bligh and Dyer extraction protocol (Bligh and Dyer 1959; Tunlid and White 1992). Briefly, the soil lipids were extracted in a one-phase chloroform/methanol/citrate buffer mixture, and the phospholipids separated by liquid chromatography over octadecyl-bonded silica columns. The phospholipids were then derivatized to their corresponding methyl esters, and analysed using GC-FID (Bååth et al. 1998). Individual PLFAs are named in the text according to standard conventions (Tunlid and White 1992).
TPH determination

Approximately 10 g soil (wet weight) were ground over anhydrous Na2SO4 using a mortar and pestle until the soil flowed freely. The sample was transferred to a 250 ml conical flask equipped with a PTFE-lined screw cap, and an internal standard (squalane) was added. Extraction was by sonication in 50 ml DCM for 10 min; the extract was then filtered (Whatman no. 4). The extraction was repeated with 25 ml DCM, filtered, and the two extracts combined. A 5 ml sample of extract was stored at –20°C in a foil-capped scintillation vial; the remainder was evaporated under nitrogen at 40°C to a volume of 1 ml. The extract was then cleaned by liquid chromatography over 2 g silica (60 Å, < 200 μm) pre-conditioned with 10 ml DCM. The sample was loaded onto the column and eluted with 2 × 10 ml DCM. TPH was then measured by GC-FID. A 1 μl volume of extract was injected using a Fisons AS800 autosampler (ThermoQuest Ltd, Wythenshawe, UK) onto a Carlo-Erba 8000 series GC (ThermoQuest Ltd) equipped with a Phenomenex ZB-1 capillary column (30 m × 0·32 mm, d=0·5 μm) (Phenomenex, Macclesfield, UK), split injector with a split ratio of 20 : 1, and flame ionization detector. GC conditions were as follows. Column gas flow (N2): 1 ml min–1; split flow: 20 ml min–1; injector temperature: 250°C; detector temperature: 320°C. The temperature programme used was 80°C, held for 2 min, then increased at 10°C min–1 to 320°C and held for 10 min.
Data analysis

Data (total PLFAs, respiration, TPH) were analysed for statistically significant differences using two-way ANOVA in randomized blocks, considering sample date and soil type as treatments, and experimental replication as blocking structure. Principal components analysis (PCA) was carried out for both PLFA and Biolog profiles on normalized data, i.e. data expressed as a percentage of the average value of the set. Further details of manipulation of data from sole carbon source utilization tests prior to PCA are given above.
RESULTS
Hydrocarbon removal

Diesel was readily degraded in all three soils, with around 60% having been removed by day 103 (Fig. 1). Biodegradation and abiotic losses were not discriminated. There were no significant differences in the total amount of diesel removed by the end of the experiment, but the initial rate of loss in the Boyndie soil (BY) was slower than for the other two soil types.

Respiration and biomass

Changes in microbial parameters confirmed that biodegradation was taking place. Respiration increased after addition of diesel for all three soils (Fig. 2). Maximum respiration for both Insch (IN) and Countesswells (CW) diesel-contaminated soil had occurred by day 27, and had decreased to control or near-control levels by the end of the experiment. The maximum respiration for BY was observed on day 62, and was still significantly elevated over control levels by the end of the experiment. All three uncontaminated soils had an elevated rate of respiration at day 1 compared with the rest of the experiment, possibly because of the disturbance involved in mixing the soils and placing them into the microcosms.

Microbial biomass (as measured by total PLFA concentrations; Fig. 3) was also stimulated by diesel addition. IN and CW diesel-contaminated soil reached a maximum of biomass by day 27, at which point the levels were significantly elevated over the equivalent control soil. After day 27, the biomass decreased in the diesel-contaminated soils, and for IN was below the control biomass by the conclusion of the experiment. Microbial biomass was also stimulated in BY soil by the addition of diesel, and reached its maximum value by day 103. BY had a lower biomass than for IN and CW, both at the start and for the entire duration of the experiment; concentrations were significantly lower than for IN and CW at all times for both control and diesel-contaminated soils.

Changes in soil pH

Trends in the soil pH were also affected by diesel contamination. For IN and BY, the pH in the diesel-contaminated soils remained at a constant level, but the pH in the control soils showed a significant decrease of 0·8–1·0 pH units during the course of the experiment (Fig. 4). CW did not show the same pattern.

Sole carbon source utilization profiles
MT carbon sources.

A green colour appeared after a short time in wells containing 2,3-dihydroxynaphthalene; it was presumed that this was caused by an abiotic reaction, and the results from these wells were not included in further multivariate analysis. All straight-chain carboxylic acids caused colour development for all of the samples, and none of the aromatic or cyclic carboxylic acids did so. The carbon sources added to the MT plates, when analysed in combination with the GN data (i.e. as a dataset of 115 carbon sources), did not improve the discrimination in multivariate space of the different samples when compared with the discrimination given by the GN data alone (results not shown). Analysis of the MT data alone showed no, or only poor discrimination between samples. Consequently, only the GN data were used for further data analysis, and all further results presented in this paper are those from GN data only.
GN carbon sources.

PCA of the GN carbon source data shows a clear separation of samples with respect to time, soil type and treatment (Fig. 5). The most important factor with respect to grouping the data would appear to be incubation time. The non-incubated (day 1) samples are separated from the other samples along a composite axis based on principal components 1 and 2. The incubated diesel-contaminated samples are also separated from the incubated control samples along this same axis (approximately equivalent to x=–y). Finally, samples are separated according to soil type for the diesel-contaminated samples only along a second composite axis perpendicular to the first (approximately equivalent to x=y).

The data were re-analysed by PCA for each sampling date, separately, in order to clarify the effect of diesel on the sole carbon source utilization profiles, i.e. without including incubation time as an extra potential source of variation within the data, which might mask the effects of experimental treatment. The results from these separate analyses are shown in Fig. 6(a–d).

No obvious differences were observed between soil types at day one, although CW tended to have higher PC1 scores. Biolog CLPPs at all other sampling times showed clear separation according to both soil type and treatment with diesel. It is arguable which time showed the greatest effect of oil addition. Day 27 showed a complete separation of control and treated soils for BY and IN along PC 1, although not for CW (6Fig. 6b). In comparison, by day 103, the separation caused by diesel treatment was at its most obvious; all the control soils clustered together, and were totally separated from all the treated soils. However, the separation was along PC2, and therefore did not account for as great a proportion of the variance as if it had been on PC1.

The trend of similarity between different soil types is clearer to follow. There was little difference between soil types at day one. By day 27, there was a developing effect of soil type along PC2; it is clear that diesel-treated soils are more variable along PC 2 than the control soils. By day 62, the control soils, with the exception of one outlying point, were more similar than the diesel-treated soils, lying close together in multivariate space. The effects were clearest at day 103; the control soils were now separated from the contaminated soils along PC2, and soil types were completely separated along PC1 for the contaminated soils only.
PLFA profiles

PCA of the PLFA concentration data shows that there is complete separation along PC 1 (Fig. 7) between control and diesel-treated soils for the incubated samples, i.e. diesel-contaminated soils clustered with controls at day 1 but were separated on all subsequent dates. There was some separation according to soil type along PC 2 for the incubated contaminated soils only; BY soils were distinct from CW, and IN soils were intermediate, overlapping with both BY and CW. As for the Biolog data, PCA was carried out for each sampling date separately.

The day 1 data (8Fig. 8a) were separated by soil type on a composite axis made up of PC 3 and PC 4. There was no discernible effect of treatment within the first four PCs.

The day 27 data (8Fig. 8b) show that diesel treatment is the major source of variation, with contaminated soils completely separated from control soils along PC 1. PC 1 has a high R2 value of 0·67. Samples separated according to soil type, for the contaminated soils only, along PC 2. There is no separation of soil type in the control soils.

The day 62 data (8Fig. 8c) follow the same pattern as for the day 27 data. Diesel treatment is again the major source of variation, with contaminated soils separated from control soils along PC 1. Contaminated samples only were separated with respect to soil type along PC 2; BY was completely separated from the other soil types, but IN and CW were not separated. The control soils formed a tight cluster and were not separated at all by soil type, as for the day 27 data.

The day 102 data (8Fig. 8d) were separated by treatment along a combination of PC 1 and PC 2. The amount of spread between individual data points was similar for the control and contaminated soils.

The individual PLFAs that caused the most variation along each axis were also determined by PCA. At day 27, the PLFAs most significant in causing separation along PC 1 (i.e. separation according to diesel addition) were 18 : 1ω9, 18 : 2ω6 and 17 : 1ω8 (associated with the contaminated soils), and 19 : 0cy (associated with the control soils). Examining the PCA for the day 63 and day 102 data shows that 18 : 1ω9 remains the lipid with the highest loading associated with the contaminated soils. The PLFAs 15 : 0 and 16 : 0 also appear associated with the contaminated soils for days 63 and 102.
DISCUSSION
Efficiency of bioremediation

The duration of the experiment was clearly sufficient for the initial, rapid phase of bioremediation to be completed for IN and CW; the rate of removal of oil had dropped almost to zero by the end of the experiment (Fig. 1). It can be seen that diesel was not degraded as quickly in BY soil; BY has a sandier texture than the other two soils, and contains a lower proportion of organic carbon and microbial biomass. The lower degradation rate of diesel is presumably caused by the lower microbial biomass at the start of the experiment. One consequence is that degradation had not finished in BY by the conclusion of the bioremediation treatment; evidence for this is given both by the rate of loss of oil (Fig. 1), and by the continuing elevation of soil respiration over background (control) levels (Fig. 2). This is useful insofar as it allows the comparison of the two soils in which bioremediation appears to have been completed to one in which oil degradation is still occurring, although at a lower rate than at the beginning of the experiment.

It should be noted that the total proportion of oil removed (up to about 60%) is not especially high. A more active bioremediation treatment (for example, enhancing oxygen availability) might have resulted in degradation of a greater percentage of diesel (Ritter and Scarborough 1995). However, maximizing the extent of bioremediation was not one of the aims of this study.
Selection of MT carbon sources

The MT carbon sources were selected on the basis of their expected occurrence as intermediates in hydrocarbon degradation pathways (Singer and Finnerty 1984). Carboxylic acids were chosen, rather than the parent hydrocarbons, as they possess greater water solubility and lower volatility than the equivalent hydrocarbons. Carboxylic acids have been shown to accumulate and then degrade in oil-contaminated microcosms (Watson et al. 1999). Mesarch and Nies (1997) showed that TPH in contaminated soil samples was correlated with the numbers of bacteria culturable on benzoate as a carbon source.
Lack of response to MT carbon sources

It is not known why there was no effect of oil contamination on the ability of the soil culturable communities in this study to utilize hydrocarbon-based carboxylic acids as carbon sources. One possibility is that the amount of carboxylic acid added to the microtitre wells was inhibitory for the aromatic compounds, and that a lower concentration would have permitted growth and hence, potentially differing responses (Fulthorpe and Allen 1994). A second possibility is that there was no enrichment of aromatic hydrocarbon degraders during the course of the experiment, i.e. that only the aliphatic portion of the diesel oil was being degraded, and that the capability of the indigenous population to grow on straight-chain aliphatic carboxylic acids was already so high that it was not enhanced by diesel addition. All of the soils showed the ability to degrade all of the straight-chain aliphatic carboxylic acids tested from the beginning of the experiment.
Biolog GN profiles: community response to oil pollution

The first impression that is received on examining the PCA scores plot of the entire Biolog GN dataset (Fig. 5) is that the major shift in community profiles has occurred as a result of incubation, and outweighs the effects of oil addition. Other studies using Biolog plates have also reported large incubation effects (Wünsche et al. 1995). Further information on the effects of diesel contamination on the similarity of different community profiles is therefore easier to see when the data from each sampling point are analysed separately (Fig. 6).

There is no obvious clustering at day 1. The only clear effect is that CW tends to have higher PC1 scores, but there is by no means complete separation from the other two soil types. This lack of differentiation of soil types was unexpected; possibly, the disturbance of the soils entailed by mixing and transferring to microcosms tended to reduce differences between the soil types. Certainly the soil respiration was increased over the levels that then prevailed for the remainder of the experiment (Fig. 2), which would imply that microbial activity had been disturbed. As very little is known about the dynamics and short-term effects of disturbance on Biolog community profiles, this must remain a conjectural point until further work is done.

The day 1 data do show that there was no acute effect of diesel addition on soil bacteria, as might have occurred for example if the applied diesel had had a toxic effect.

It is clear that diesel addition did not increase the similarity between different soil types, as measured by Biolog CLPPs. In fact, the opposite effect occurred; the difference between soil types increased. There was little differentiation between soil types at the beginning of the experiment. It may be argued that this could have been caused by the initial disturbance of the soil, but throughout the course of the experiment, the control soils tended to cluster together in principal component space. CW is a partial exception to this; the CW controls are separated from the other two soil types at day 27, and one out of the three CW controls is separated at day 62. Conversely, the diesel-contaminated soil types become more dissimilar during the course of the experiment and by day 62, the contaminated samples are completely separated on PC1 according to soil type, with the effect continuing by day 103.

It must be borne in mind that the increasing dissimilarity of the diesel-contaminated soil communities in multivariate space does not enable any conclusions to be drawn about absolute diversity of the soils as measured, for example, by species richness or evenness. Atlas et al. (1991) found that petrol contamination increased the ability of a microbial community to utilize a range of substrates but decreased the overall bacterial diversity. They concluded that hydrocarbon contamination selected for a reduced number of generalist, catabolically-versatile species. Lindstrom et al. (1999) studied the effects of long-term oil contamination in an Arctic soil; they inoculated Biolog plates at a range of serial dilutions, and found that increasing dilution reduced the number of substrates utilized by control soils to a much greater extent than for oil-affected soils. They similarly concluded that this showed that oil contamination selected for a less diverse, but catabolically-versatile bacterial community. Juck et al. (2000) found that, at two oil-contaminated Arctic sites investigated by DGGE and Biolog analysis, absolute diversity was decreased at one site and remained the same or increased at the other. Thus, it seems likely, on the basis of comparison with previous findings, that the absolute diversity in each one of the different soil types tested in this study would have been decreased as a result of diesel contamination. What this study demonstrates is that oil contamination and bioremediation does not lead to increasing similarity of different soil types; it seems likely that each diesel-contaminated soil converged on a different generalist bacterial community.

The results obtained from the Biolog CLPPs are dependent on culturing of bacteria (Garland and Mills 1991) and therefore, subject to biases (Haack et al. 1995; Konopka et al. 1998). This does not necessarily mean that CLPPs are meaningless for the study of soil microbial ecology, but it does require that they be interpreted with care and, ideally, compared with a non-culture-based technique (Garland 1997). Extraction and analysis of PLFAs is one such technique.
PLFA profiles: community response to oil pollution

Community PLFA profiling has previously been shown to respond to hydrocarbon-induced changes in soil populations (Macnaughton et al. 1999; White et al. 1999; Venosa et al. 2000).

The effect of diesel addition on soil community PLFA profiles is clear (Fig. 7). Diesel treatment is the major source of variation within the dataset, with much more of an effect than either incubation time or soil type. The PCA of individual date PLFA data confirms this (Fig. 8); soil types are separated on day 1, but only on a combination of PCs 3 and 4. For all the remaining time points, diesel treatment has a greater effect than soil type.

The PLFA profiles confirm the information obtained from the Biolog CLPPs about the relative similarity of the soil types and the effect of diesel addition. Diesel treatment increases the disparity in community structure of the different soil types as measured by PLFA profiles. It can be seen particularly clearly for the day 27 data (8Fig. 8b), when biodegradative activity was at a maximum (as shown by diesel removal, respiration and biomass levels), that the three soil types are completely separated along PC 2 for the contaminated soils, yet the control soils form a single group. This pattern is also continued for the day 63 results.
Individual PLFAs affected by diesel addition

The specific PLFAs that change between samples in PLFA profiling for microbial ecology are often interpreted to give some idea as to which taxonomic groups are changing, and also the nutritional status of the microbiota. However, in general, this is not valuable for studies of oil bioremediation as usually, all that can be deduced is that oil contamination leads to a relative increase in the proportion of Gram-negative bacteria within the community (Venosa et al. 2000). In this study, the PLFAs 18 : 1ω9 and 17 : 1ω8 were increased by diesel bioremediation; the ω9 series of monounsaturated PLFAs have been ascribed to Gram-positive bacteria. This indicates the difficulty of unambiguously explaining changes in PLFAs, when the PLFAs are not found solely in a single taxonomic group. A possible complicating effect is that growth on hydrocarbons may change the lipid profiles of individual strains (Doumenq et al. 1999). It has been suggested that sphingolipids may be genuine biomarkers for hydrocarbon-degrading populations (White et al. 1998; Zelles 1999), but sphingolipids were not measured in this study. The PLFA 18 : 2ω6 can be reliably assigned to the soil fungal community, and the changes in 18 : 2ω6 observed at day 27 indicates that there was an increase in the fungal community caused by diesel addition.
Direct comparison of Biolog and PLFA

It is instructive to compare directly the performance of the two community-level techniques. Several previous studies have done this for soil microbial communities (e.g. Bååth et al. 1998; Bossio and Scow 1998; Yao et al. 2000), but none directly for the assessment of oil contamination and bioremediation. The clearest difference is that the Biolog CLPPs were much more affected by incubation than were the PLFA profiles. Thus, in one sense, the CLPPs were more `sensitive' than PLFA profiling and may suggest important changes in the properties of the culturable micro-organisms. This sensitivity to incubation, however, is not useful in the context of assessing changes caused by an external treatment, in this case diesel addition and bioremediation. The effects of diesel addition are much more clearly observed in the PLFA profiles than the Biolog CLPPs, particularly when data from all the time points are analysed simultaneously.

White et al. (1998) suggested that the multivariate response of the microbial community, i.e. the community profile, could be used to evaluate the success of bioremediation; a perturbation observed in multivariate space, followed by a return to control levels, would indicate that bioremediation had successfully mitigated the impact on the microbial community. In this study, there was no evidence of a return to control profiles for the Biolog CLPPs. There was some indication that the microbial community structure may have returned to control profiles for the PLFA data. The IN diesel-contaminated soil shows the greatest deviation from uncontaminated soils at day 27, and is progressively closer to the control soils at day 63 and day 102 (Fig. 7). Furthermore, the control and diesel-contaminated soils are separated along PC 1 for the days 27 and 63 data, but along a combination of PCs 1 and 2 for the day 102 data (Fig. 8), i.e. the amount of variation in the dataset attributable to diesel contamination had decreased.

In conclusion, this study has confirmed the null hypothesis: diesel contamination of different soil types did not lead to increasing similarity of the microbial communities. In fact, the effect of diesel on both PLFA and Biolog profiles was to make much more distinct the separation between soil types. It appears that soil types, representing differing environmental matrices and different initial microbial communities, have different inherent microbial responses to hydrocarbon contamination and thus, possibly, degradation potential. The largest changes seen in the Biolog CLPPs were caused by incubation rather than diesel contamination. It is likely that soil microcosm studies, which, of necessity, use disturbed soils under artificial conditions, are not representative of in situ effects. Future work using Biolog CLPPs to investigate oil remediation would be best carried out with contaminated field sites.

