Engineered in situ bioremediation of soil and groundwater polluted with weathered hydrocarbons

    Demelza Menendez-Vegaa, Jose Luis R. Gallegob, Ana Isabel Pelaeza, Gonzalo Fernandez de Cordobac, Javier Morenod, Daniel Muñozd, Jesus Sancheza, , 

 Show more

        https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejsobi.2007.03.005
    Get rights and content

Abstract

In this work, we present our experience in the engineered in situ biostimulation of a hydrocarbon-polluted subsoil of an old metal-working plant. The site had a long history of fuel, lubricant oil, and diesel spills and leakages that were initially treated by means of physico-chemical techniques. After one year of treatment, weathered hydrocarbons were firmly sorbed in the unsaturated zone, limiting the effectiveness of the physico-chemical methods being applied. Also, low nutrient and dissolved oxygen levels limited natural attenuation yields. Therefore, a bioremediation approach based on the injection of hydrogen peroxide, an oleophilic fertilizer, and a surfactant was applied. Total petroleum hydrocarbons and gas chromatography-mass spectrometry determinations were performed as a chemical means of monitoring the process. Microbial populations, including the presence of hydrocarbon-degrading bacteria, were simultaneously analyzed during the process, using enrichment techniques and confocal laser scanning microscopy observations with fluorescent indicators. Hydrocarbon-degrading bacteria were already present in the polluted subsoil prior to the implementation of this bioremediation technique and increased noticeably during the first 2 months of treatment. Hence, the suitability of the nutrient and oxygen amending approach was confirmed as further demonstrated by chemical determinations.
Keywords

    In situ bioremediation; Degrading bacteria; Hydrocarbon; Soil; Groundwater; Viability; Activity; Confocal laser scanning microscopy

1. Introduction

Soils and groundwater at many industrial sites are often contaminated by hydrocarbon that leaks from underground storage tanks or pipelines and by accidental spills. In situ bioremediation techniques have been used for years to remediate these hydrocarbon-polluted sites. Bioremediation is an environmentally friendly treatment and allows “brownfields” to be redeveloped by removing residual contaminants in soil and groundwater [39]. Specifically, in situ treatments are well-known and cost-effective methods that usually eliminate the need for expensive excavation and emission control [48]. Thus, microbiological decontamination of petroleum hydrocarbons in polluted environments is claimed to be an efficient, economic, and versatile alternative, or complement, to physico-chemical treatments [30] ;  [26]. However, before starting in situ bioremediation protocols, it is important to establish the indigenous microbial potential and to assess the limiting factors to be controlled during treatment [21].

Aerobic treatments for hydrocarbon bioremediation are the preferred way to improve degradation yields, given that the most common degraders are aerobic [47]; [49] ;  [10]. For this reason, engineering systems or chemical amendments are usually applied in order to oxygenate the groundwater and soil. For instance, both solid and liquid peroxides have been used in hydrocarbon bioremediation. In particular, hydrogen peroxide is probably the most widely used product, thanks to its high oxygen-releasing potential. Furthermore, this treatment is easy to dose, inexpensive, non-persistent, and safe when properly used [25] ;  [38]. Another constraint that must be considered for effective bioremediation, is the nutrient level at the site of intervention. Oleophilic fertilizers are one of the most widely used products for natural environment amendment. In light of the fact that they adhere to hydrocarbons and provide nutrients at the oil–water interface, they have been extensively applied in marine oil spills [7] ;  [11]. Moreover, recent developments have proposed the usefulness of these products for treating hydrocarbon-polluted groundwater and soil [19].

The presence of bacteria with degrading capacities is a critical aspect of bioremediation [18]; [9] ;  [27], while the availability of contaminants is a major factor in biodegradation [21]. Hydrocarbon-degrading microorganisms produce a variety of surface-active agents that improve bioavailability [40], but an exogenous surfactant may still be required when the contaminants are highly hydrophobic and/or firmly sorbed in clay particles or organic matter within the soil. Therefore, surfactants have been used in bioremediation technologies to improve the bioavailability of organic compounds and, hence, biodegradation rates [46]; [29] ;  [35]. With the aforementioned considerations in mind and after a complete screening, it was decided that the field approach applied in this work would consist of the addition of an oleophilic fertilizer, an oxygen-releasing compound (hydrogen peroxide), and a commercial surfactant. The microbial community and populations of hydrocarbon-degraders were monitored simultaneously with the changes in the composition of the contaminants as an evaluation of the effectiveness of the in situ approach selected. Additional objectives included the characterization of the predominant indigenous microorganisms before, during, and after biostimulation and the assessment of bacterial activity/viability using fluorescence techniques. The evolution of microbial populations was studied using the combination of conventional laboratory techniques such as microbial counting and selective enrichment. The diversity of pollutant-degrading microorganisms was analyzed by means of 16S rRNA gene studies [5]; [32] ;  [28].
2. Materials and methods
2.1. Chemical methods
2.1.1. Hydrocarbon analysis

Groundwater and soil samples were collected in appropriate bottles which were sealed and stored in the dark at 4 °C. After extracting the hydrocarbon with dichloromethane (EPA Method 8015), the total petroleum hydrocarbons (TPH) content was determined in both groundwater and soil samples by gas chromatography-flame ionization detector (GC-FID). Further characterization of pollutants and control of biodegradation was performed with gas chromatography–mass spectrometry (GC–MS) techniques. For liquid samples, hydrocarbon extraction was conducted by circulation through a solid phase extraction (SPE) cartridge (EPA Method 3535) and subsequent washing with 20 ml dichloromethane. Soil samples and pure product analyses were conducted by extraction using a Soxhlet apparatus and purified by liquid chromatography (EPA Method 3540C). Both SPE and liquid chromatography extracts were injected into a gas chromatograph (GC) system HP 6890 Series equipped with a capillary column (AT5 Alltech, 25 m length and 0.25 mm internal diameter). The column oven temperature was raised from 60 °C to 300 °C at 6 °C/min and the injector temperature was set at 275 °C. This equipment was linked to a mass detector (MSD) HP 5973 Series which allowed peak area determinations in selective ion mode (SIM) using the Wiley 275 database (EPA Method 8270C). Chemical biomarker determinations (isoprenoids and hopanes) were used to evaluate biodegradation [50] ;  [37].
2.1.2. Groundwater monitoring

Levels of dissolved oxygen, pH, redox potential, and conductivity were controlled weekly in the injection and monitoring wells by standard electrodes (Hanna Instruments). Nitrogen (both nitrate and ammonium) and phosphorus consumption were determined by means of spectrophotometric methods (Hach Instruments).
2.2. Microbiological methods

Different microbiological methods were used in the first screening (carried out before implementation of the bioremediation intervention) and in the subsequent monitoring program during and after bioremediation.
2.2.1. Microbial counts and selective enrichment techniques

Microbial populations in the different monitoring wells of the four polluted zones were periodically monitored by conventional plate-counting using two types of growth media. The first one was a rich complex medium (CM) designed for growing most culturable chemo-organotrophic bacteria (Tryptic Soy Broth (TSB), Merck, 0.05% yeast extract, and 1.5% agar). The second one was the solid degradation medium (DM) (0.3% NH4NO3; 0.05% MgSO4·7H2O; 2% CaCl2·2H2O; 0.007% K2HPO4; 0.05% KH2PO4; 2% agar with 0.5% commercial filter-sterilized diesel as the sole carbon source) used to recover most culturable hydrocarbon degraders. Plate counts in both cases were performed as follows: an 80 ml sample of groundwater was obtained in sterile conditions and centrifuged for 10 min at 15,000 rpm; the resulting sediment was then diluted with 4 ml of sterile distilled water. Then 2 ml were taken for enrichment techniques, 1 ml for microscopic examinations and the rest for 10-fold serial dilutions that were spread over the surface of duplicate agar plates. The media were incubated at 30 °C for 48 h in the case of CM and 1 week for DM; colonies were counted to quantify the total indigenous bacterial CFU and hydrocarbon-degrader content. Enrichment techniques were conducted in DM liquid medium with the following carbon sources: 2% fuel oil; 2% lubricant oil; and 2% of diesel fuel (depending on the area from which the sample was taken). Two milliliters of the concentrated groundwater (see above) were added to 100 ml of medium and incubated in a rotary shaker at 250 rpm and 30 °C for 5 days. Two milliliters of the culture were then inoculated again in 100 ml of the same medium. This procedure was repeated three times.
2.2.2. Bacteria identification and RFLP grouping

Sequence analysis of 16S bacterial ribosomal DNA (16S rDNA) was performed on selected isolates after DNA extraction by a commercial kit (Chemagic Bac 100 Kit, Chemagen). The 16S rDNA was amplified by PCR using the conserved eubacterial primers pA (5′-AGA GTT TGA TCC TGG CTC AG-3′) and pH (5′-AAG GAG GTG ATC CAG CCG CA-3′) [8]. The 50 μl reaction mixture contained 2 mM dNTPs mix (Amersham Biosciences), 30 pmol/μl of each primer (pA and pH), 1.5 mM MgCl2, 10× polymerase buffer, 0.2 μl Eco Taq DNA polymerase (Ecogen), and finally, the mixture was overlaid with 50 μl mineral oil. The PCR program was as follows: denaturation at 95 °C for 5 min; 30 cycles of 1 min at 95 °C; annealing for 1 min at 57 °C; and extension for 90 s at 72 °C; followed by a final extension at 72 °C for 10 min. The amplification products (1500 pbs) were routinely analyzed by horizontal gel electrophoresis in 0.8% agarose gel in Tris–Borate–EDTA (TBE), followed by ethidium bromide staining and visualization under UV light. Lambda phage DNA digested with PstI restriction enzyme was included on the gel in order to confirm the size of the amplified product. PCR products from the extracted bands were purified by GFX™ PCR DNA and Gel Band Purification Kit (Amersham Biosciences) as per the manufacturer's instructions.

Species were grouped by restriction fragment length polymorphism analysis (RFLP) of the 16S rDNA with HaeIII, AluI, and HhaI endonucleases to reduce the number of isolates by identifying duplicates. The 20 μl restriction digestion mixture contained 1 U of enzyme, 10× restriction enzyme buffer, and 0.5–1.0 μg DNA. The mixture was incubated at 37 °C for 2 h and the reaction products were analyzed on a 3% agarose gel in TBE, followed by SYBR Gold (Invitrogen) staining and visualization under UV light. Finally, 16S rDNA sequences from the different restriction profile groups were obtained in an ABI Prism™ 3100 Genetic Analyzer (Perking Elmer) and identification was made using the Gapped BLAST database search program facility of the National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) [1].
2.2.3. Microscopy techniques

Basic morphological information of samples was obtained by phase contrast microscopy observations under a Nikon Eclipse E-200 microscope with a Nikon CoolPix 990 digital camera. Bacterial viability was analyzed by staining the cells with propidium iodide (PI) and SYTO 9 green fluorescent nucleic acid stain (LIVE/DEAD BacLight Bacterial Viability Kit, Molecular Probes) at a wavelength of 488 nm and 568 nm excitation, respectively, and at 530 nm (green) or 630 nm (red) emission. In the presence of both stains, bacteria with intact cell membranes appear fluorescent green, whereas membrane-compromised bacteria appear red [20]. Cell activity was analyzed by incubating the cells for 15 min at 30 °C in a carboxyfluorescein diacetate (CFDA) solution [24] at a final concentration of 30 μM. Cells were then washed twice with distilled water and observed directly under the CLSM microscope at a wavelength of 488 nm excitation and 530 nm emission. Cell membrane potential was analyzed by staining the cells with rhodamine 123, which is a vital stain that selectively accumulates in cells with an intact membrane potential and has been widely employed in prokaryotic cell studies [33]. Samples were incubated at 30 °C for 15 min in a 0.2 mg/ml final concentration solution of rhodamine 123 (Sigma), washed twice with distilled water, and observed under CLSM at a wavelength of 514 nm excitation and 563 nm emission. A Leica TCS-SP2-AOBS confocal laser-scanning microscope was used. The images obtained were mixed using the Leica Confocal Software.
2.3. Products and dosages for in situ bioremediation

Three products and dosages were used in the bioremediation approach. The first product was S200, an oleophilic fertilizer distributed by IEP (http://www.iepeurope.com) and selected to enhance nutrient levels. It is a relatively new product and is listed as a bioremediation agent in the National Oil and Hazardous Substances Pollution Contingency Plan (NCP), USA. Its composition (urea, phosphoric ester, water, oleic acid, and glycol ether) boosts emulsification, thereby enabling dilution to take place. As previously tested in our lab, S200 improves hydrocarbon biodegradation (data not shown). The product was injected and infiltrated at appropriate dosages, according to the total amount of hydrocarbons present in the different areas of the subsoil and adjusted to a C:N ratio of 10:1. The second product used was diluted hydrogen peroxide (250 mg/l), which was applied in continuous injections that completed an amount congruent with the stechiometric oxygen demand of the hydrocarbons polluting the site (approximately 2500 kg; see Section 3). This dosification was adjusted weekly to achieve and sustain dissolved oxygen levels of 6–8 mg/l in the polluted groundwater. The third compound was Bioversal HC, a biodegradable chemical surfactant commonly used in hydrocarbon remediation and distributed in Spain by IEP Europe. It was infiltrated from trenches to “wash” the hydrocarbons sorbed in the unsaturated zone. The dosages were selected on the basis of our previous experiences at other field sites and on manufacturers' recommendations (1 kg of surfactant per 10 kg of hydrocarbons to be desorbed).
3. Results
3.1. Field site description and previous works

The field site studied was the subsoil of an old metal-working factory, located in northern Spain and polluted by different mixtures of hydrocarbons released over several decades of industrial activity (Fig. 1). At the beginning of 2002, a detailed study of the site pollution and local hydrogeology was performed, revealing more than 7000 kg of low density non-aqueous phase liquids (LNAPL) affecting the groundwater and slowly flowing towards a main river close to the factory, as well as 3000 kg of hydrocarbons firmly sorbed in the vadose zone covering a total surface area of around 2 ha. The different boreholes drilled enabled three contaminant plumes and a fourth area to be located that corresponded with mixtures of the three contaminants. Therefore, four zones were delimited (Fig. 1): Z1 for the fuel-oil spilled from a heating system; Z2 for the lubricant-oil leaked from metal-working units; Z3 for diesel fuel spilled from underground tanks; and Z4 for a perimeter with mixtures of the three contaminants. In addition, hydrogeological studies detected water tables ranging from 3 m in the areas closest to the river up to 6 m in the areas furthest away. Finally, the data obtained from the boreholes and geophysical studies revealed that the heterogeneous characteristics of the subsoil mainly comprised of complex mixtures of alluvial sediments, loams, clay, and dolomite, combined with anthropic fillers (slag and building waste).

Remediation works started with physico-chemical techniques that included the installation of a hydraulic barrier to keep groundwater from being discharged into the river, as well as the implementation of a “pump and treat” system to remove free phases of hydrocarbons from the polluted groundwater. After more than one year of treatment, most of the LNAPLs were removed (monthly removal of approximately 500 l of hydrocarbons). Nevertheless, some LNAPLs remained, in addition to the weathered contaminants sorbed to the soil in the unsaturated zone, which promoted periodic hydrocarbon leaching into the groundwater, depending on water table fluctuations.
3.2. Initial screening and implementation of a bioremediation approach

In the spring of 2003, monthly sampling and subsequent TPH analysis revealed decreasing efficiency of the “pump and treat” system. The analysis showed that approximately 2000 kg of hydrocarbons were being consistently retained in the unsaturated zone and in around 500 kg of free phases in the groundwater throughout the site. At that time, the soil and groundwater were studied in order to choose a suitable bioremediation strategy and to establish successive monitoring. GC–MS analysis indicated the presence of different profiles, corresponding to the three contaminant plumes previously mentioned (Fig. 2). Irrespective of the age of the spills, all the contaminants (but in particular the fuel-oil) had been affected by strong weathering (Fig. 2).

The complete geochemical characterization revealed common features in all the zones studied, such as the low bioavailability of contaminants (predominantly the heavy hydrocarbons detected in the unsaturated zone) as determined by the geological nature of the subsoil previously described, and the absence of appropriate levels of nutrients and dissolved oxygen (N levels less than 1 mg/l and P less than 0.1 mg/l in most monitoring wells; average dissolved O2 levels were below 2 mg/l) for aerobic groundwater bioremediation purposes. Microbial populations with hydrocarbon-degrading metabolic abilities were also detected (see below). Therefore, a 4 month sequential treatment with proper dosages of the above mentioned products was implemented, in order to stimulate microbial activity. Soil washing (surfactant infiltration), fertilizer injection, and microbiological chemical sampling were performed in the first, second, and fourth week of each month, respectively. H2O2 injection was continuous and groundwater monitoring was carried out once a week during the entire treatment period. The treatment was initially designed to continue for up to six or eight months, but the excellent results obtained made it possible to conclude earlier than expected. For this extension, the existing pumping system was improved by digging trenches and new wells to enable the amendments (diluted hydrogen peroxide and the oleophilic fertilizer S-200) to be injected/infiltrated. Prior to these periodic injections, the surfactant Bioversal HC was infiltrated through the unsaturated zone to initially desorb as much of the hydrocarbon content remaining above the water table as possible.
3.3. Monitoring of in situ bioremediation

After transitory fluctuations, amendment dosages (hydrogen peroxide, S-200, and Bioversal HC) were finally adjusted to achieve adequate levels of dissolved oxygen (5–10 mg/l, irrespective of the monitoring well) and nutrients. Average N levels of 10 mg/l and P levels of approximately 2 mg/l in the groundwater were reached during the treatment period. Wherever it was needed, the nutrient injection was decreased to avoid eutrophication. The pH ranged from 6.5 to 8 and average conductivity of 600 μS/cm were also measured. Finally, subsoil temperatures ranged between 22 °C and 26 °C (treatment was implemented during the summer). Plate counting revealed a remarkable increase in the microbial populations during the first 2–3 months of biostimulant injection in all the zones sampled (Fig. 3a–c). However, bacteria numbers subsequently declined, especially those growing in DM medium. The noticeably lower values corresponding to the samples collected during month 4 can be partially accounted for by a dilution effect, due to an elevation of the water table following a rainy period. After completing the process, the CM and DM microbial populations returned to their initial values (Fig. 3a,b) and even fell to below initial levels (Fig. 3c). Average values of samples obtained from the monitoring wells (Fig. 3d) clearly confirmed the same trend as described above: a noticeable increase of microbial populations at the beginning of treatment, followed by a decline at the end of the intervention to levels that were slightly lower than the initial values.

Selective enrichment enabled a significant number of hydrocarbon-degraders from the four zones to be isolated. Within these strains, further selection was carried out based on two criteria: persistence throughout the enrichment procedure and the presence of the same microorganisms in several samples of the same or different zones. The most abundant strains isolated after plate-counting of the successive enrichments were grouped by RFLP analysis and characterized by conventional microbiological determinations (gram, oxidase test, morphology, mobility) prior to undergoing detailed identification. Sequence analysis of 16S bacterial ribosomal DNA of the isolates detected different bacterial genera throughout the process (Table 1). The most widely represented genera with respect to the species encountered (Table 1) were Pseudomonas, followed by Acinetobacter, Microbacterium, Ralstonia, Achromobacter, Micrococcus, Ochrobactrum, and Rhodococcus. Further analysis of the different species from the genera listed in Table 1, identified Achromobacter xylosoxidans (Accession DQ303927), Acinetobacter sp. (Accession DQ303926), Microbacterium oxydans (Accession AY785738), Ochrobactrum anthropi (Accession AY776289), and Pseudomonas putida (Accession DQ112329) as the most common species isolated throughout the monitorization of the different zones. On the other hand, CLSM observations from direct in situ samples and enrichment cultures distinctly revealed the viability and activity of the microorganisms, as well as their interaction with the contaminants (Fig. 4).

Finally, microbial activity was also confirmed by TPH determinations of groundwater samples during the process. The results show a remarkable decrease in hydrocarbon concentrations from the very first month of treatment (Table 2). By the end of the fourth month of treatment, groundwater TPH levels were negligible and contaminant levels in the unsaturated zone were also very low; consequently, biostimulation was terminated and a monitoring program for natural attenuation was implemented to complete remediation works. GC–MS studies of selected samples of the site demonstrated that most of the degradation observed was attributable to microbial activity (Fig. 5 ;  Fig. 6; see Section 4 for details).

4. Discussion

Hydrocarbon-polluted soils and groundwater are present in more than half of all sites that are subject to bioremediation [4]. Although most of the components of fuels and other petroleum derivatives are degradable, natural biodegradation yields depend on the presence or absence of adequate degraders, oxygen, and nutrient levels, and the bioavailability of the contaminants. As extensively reported, hydrocarbon-degraders are ubiquitous [18] ;  [34], especially wherever there is a history of hydrocarbon spills. Therefore, approaches such as bioaugmentation are usually ruled out for in situ treatments and biostimulation approaches are preferred.

By adding N and P, the C/N and C/P ratios in the soil approximate bacterial C/N and C/P requirements [6]. However, in our work, additional amendments to boost aerobic metabolism and pollutant bioavailability were required and a novel combination of a surfactant [15], an oleophilic fertilizer, plus an oxygen-releasing compound was used to foster both biodegradation and soil washing, thereby enhancing bioavailability. The results proved that after the sequential application of these three products, pollution levels clearly declined over a short period of time, which coincided with the exponential growth-phase of the microbial populations. Nevertheless, most of the contaminants were initially not very biodegradable. For instance, a noticeable weathering of hydrocarbons in the lubricant-polluted zone (Z2) was observed prior to treatment (Fig. 5c) in comparison with the pure compound that had been spilled (Fig. 5a,b). This chemical composition, consisting of a reduced presence of linear alkanes (caused by the long time that had elapsed since the spillages had occurred), should not have promoted significant microbial degradation. Nevertheless, the high specialization of the populations (see below) and the activity of both the surfactant and oleophilic fertilizer made the remaining linear alkanes and other branched and cyclic compounds available within a short period of time. Consequently, the contaminants were further degraded during the treatment (Fig. 5d). Similar behaviors were observed in the other zones studied, as shown in Fig. 6. These additional results reveal that most of the reduction (Table 2) of the TPH content in both groundwater and soil was due to microbial activity.

As stated above, the process seemed to be particularly efficient during the first two months, when hydrocarbon-degraders were growing rapidly. This is not surprising if we consider the long historical record of hydrocarbon spillage at the site, which surely promoted the adaptation of microbial populations. As a conclusion, a dual phase pattern of degradation was observed that was characterized by initial fast degradation, followed by slow degradation. Similar microbial behavior has been reported by Vinas et al. [45] who found that the addition of nutrients resulted in a high first-order degradation rate during the first 45 days, which declined markedly after 90 days, at which point the sizes of heterotrophic and polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon (PAH) degrading microbial populations returned to the initial values. Analogous results were obtained by Kaplan et al. [27]: TPH degradation was rapid during the first 3 weeks and then it slowed down for the remainder of the 24 week project. During that study, a sharp increase in plate counts was reported during the first 3 weeks, indicating an increase in biomass associated with petroleum degradation.

Fluorescent indicators of viability and/or activity have been widely used in bacteria studies [31], although their application to the environment, especially in bioremediation practices, has been scarcer [23]; [36] ;  [16]. As shown in this work, these stains, in combination with CLSM observations, make it possible to directly observe the bacterial viability status in both in situ samples and during the enrichment process ( Fig. 4). These analyses provide a suitable complement to the investigation of bacterial groups and their degrading capabilities and will become increasingly useful in monitoring bacteria in, for example, bioaugmentation experiments [23]. With respect to the characteristics of the microbial communities involved in the degradation process, all the strains listed in Table 1 are capable of growing in both liquid and DM solid media with hydrocarbons as the sole carbon source. Most of these genera (Acinetobacter, Pseudomonas, Rhodococcus, Stenotrophomonas, etc.) have been previously described as hydrocarbon-degraders [43]; [48]; [12]; [44] ;  [17]. Remarkably, some Ochrobactrum species seemed to be the most abundant bacteria in crude oil [51], although, unlike in our results, it was not possible to isolate the bacterium in agar plates. The differences in the relative abundance of these bacterial genera may have to do with their metabolic capabilities, which act on specific carbon sources, as well as the chemical composition of the existing petroleum hydrocarbons during the different sampling periods [28]. It is of interest to note the five most frequently isolated species throughout the whole study in the different zones. Some of them, such as Pseudomonas putida and Acinetobacter sp., have been previously reported at many oil-contaminated sites [18]; [44]; [13] ;  [41]. Microbacterium oxydans has been isolated in petroleum-contaminated tropical soils [42]. Achromobacter xylosoxidans has not been described in oil-contaminated soils, although it has been isolated in PAHs and toluidine-contaminated soils [22] ;  [2]. Finally, Ochrobactrum anthropi has not been previously described in oil-contaminated soils with the exception of a recent report [51] in which, as in our work, this bacterium was often detected in the oily samples analyzed. After contamination of pristine soil with petroleum, an increase in microbial activity, but a decrease in microbial diversity, is generally observed [3]. These phenomena had conceivably already taken place in the subsoil studied here, given the long history of hydrocarbon pollution at the site. Despite this, a further reduction in diversity of the cultivable bacteria was observed (Table 1). This is probably due to the individual response of the bacteria to the carbon source depletion (Table 2). Communities can otherwise be expected to behave differently in places where spills are recent [14].
5. Conclusion

This study has provided data regarding the successful application of amendments (oleophilic fertilizer, surfactant, and hydrogen peroxide) to achieve in situ bioremediation at a hydrocarbon-polluted site. The identification of low dissolved oxygen levels and the limited bioavailability of the hydrocarbons indicated that the classic approach of providing additional nutrients should be complemented by adding the other two products. The effectiveness of the selected bioremediation strategy was particularly significant within the first two months of treatment, revealing the previous adaptation of the microbial populations due to their long-term exposure to leakages and spills. Moreover, the chemical analyses confirmed the disappearance of the contaminants and hence the effectiveness of the treatment. In-depth molecular studies are needed to fully understand the behavior of microbial communities during bioremediation in contaminated environments such the one presented.