58A
Enhanced biodegradation of aromatic pollutants in cocultures of anaerobic
and aerobic bacterial consortia
Jim A. Field 1, Alfons J.M. Stams 2, Mario Kato 1 & Gosse Schraa 2
1 Department of Environmental Technology, Wageningen Agricultural University, Bomenweg 2, 6703 HD
Wageningen, The Netherlands; 2 Department of Microbiology, Wageningen Agricultural University, Hesselink van
Suchtelenweg 4, 6703 CT, Wageningen, The Netherlands
Accepted 2 August 1994
Key words: xenobiotics, chloroaromatics, nitroaromatics, azo dyes, aromatic amines, recalcitrance, bioremediation,
sequential-degradation, synchronous-degradation, mineralization, polymerization, oxygen tolerance
Abstract
Toxic aromatic pollutants, concentrated in industrial wastes and contaminated sites, can potentially be eliminated
by low cost bioremediation systems. Most commonly, the goal of these treatment systems is directed at providing
optimum environmental conditions for the mineralization of the pollutants by naturally occurring microflora.
Electrophilic aromatic pollutants with multiple chloro, nitro and azo groups have proven to be persistent to
biodegradation by aerobic bacteria. These compounds are readily reduced by anaerobic consortia to lower chlorinated
aromatics or aromatic amines but are not mineralized further. The reduction increases the susceptibility
of the aromatic molecule for oxygenolytic attack. Sequencing anaerobic and aerobic biotreatment steps provide
enhanced mineralization of many electrophilic aromatic pollutants. The combined activity of anaerobic and aerobic
bacteria can also be obtained in a single treatment step if the bacteria are immobilized in particulate matrices (e.g.
biofilm, soil aggregate, etc.). Due to the rapid uptake of oxygen by aerobes and facultative bacteria compared to the
slow diffusion of oxygen, oxygen penetration into active biofilms seldom exceeds several hundred micrometers.
The anaerobic microniches established inside the biofilms can be applied to the reduction of electron withdrawing
functional groups in order to prepare recalcitrant aromatic compounds for further mineralization in the aerobic
outer layer of the biofilm.
Aside from mineralization, polyhydroxylated and chlorinated phenols as well as nitroaromatics and aromatic
amines are susceptible to polymerization in aerobic environments. Consequently, an alternative approach for
bioremediation systems can be directed towards incorporating these aromatic pollutants into detoxified humic-like
substances. The activation of aromatic pollutants for polymerization can potentially be encouraged by an anaerobic
pretreatment step prior to oxidation. Anaerobic bacteria can modify aromatic pollutants by demethylating methoxy
groups and reducing nitro groups. The resulting phenols and aromatic amines are readily polymerized in a subsequent
aerobic step.
Introduction
Aromatic compounds are the second most abundant
family of organic constituents present in the biosphere
after carbohydrates. The most important natural source
of aromatic compounds are poorly biodegradable polymers
such as lignin, condensed tannins and humus
(Field & Lettinga 1992; Kirk & Farrell 1987; Stevenson
1982). Lignin, which is composed of phenylpropanoid
units, accounts for 17 to 33% of the dry
weight of wood (Kirk & Farrell 1987). Other aromatic
compounds of lower MW such as flavonoids,
aromatic amino acids and phenolic acids account for
the bulk of the more readily metabolizable aromatic
compounds occurring in the natural environment
(Fuchs et al. 1994). Since the start of the industrial
revolution, a wide variety of aromatic pollutants
have also been introduced into the environment through 
48
anthropogenic activity. The main sources of the anthropogenic
aromatics are summarized in Table 1. Originally
it was thought that aromatic pollutants such as
halogenated aromatics and nitroaromatics were foreign
to the environment and consequently these have been
termed as 'xenobiotic' compounds. However there is
increasing evidence that halogenated aromatics are not
so uncommon to life. More than 1500 naturally occurring
organohalogens have now been identified (Gribble
1992). Chlorinated aromatics produced by fungi
were recently shown to occur at surprisingly high
concentrations (75 mg kg -1) in the environment (De
Jong et al. 1994). Likewise there are some indications
that nitroaromatics occur naturally. Fungi are known
which produce nitroanisole as a secondary metabolite
(Thaller & Turner 1972).
The persistence of the anthropogenic aromatics in
the environment has caused great public alarm due
to their toxicity, mutagenicity and bioconcentration
in higher organisms (Hutzinger & Veerkamp 1981).
Through government regulatory agencies and market
pressures, industries are slowly modifying their processes
to decrease aromatic emissions. Complete prevention
of aromatic pollution has been proposed as a
long term goal; however, there is still a great need to
remediate the present discharges and aromatic pollution
inherited from the past. The use of microorganisms
to degrade aromatic pollution is an interesting lowcost
approach for the treatment of industrial effluents,
contaminated sediments, soil and groundwater. Typically,
bioremediation is practised by providing favorable
environmental conditions in order to stimulate
the degradation of pollutants by naturally occurring
microflora (Liu & Sulfita 1993). The biodegradative
capacities must be developed by carefully selecting
the correct combination of electron donors, electron
acceptors and in the case of cometabolism, the choice
of the primary substrate. Additionally, bioremediation
usually entails the supplementation of limiting nutrients.

Anaerobic or aerobic biodegradative capacities can
be selected, depending on whether molecular oxygen
is eliminated or supplied. In the biosphere, there is
approximately a 40,000 times excess of molecular oxygen
compared to organic carbon (Schink 1988a), indicating
that most organic matter degradation occurs in
aerobic environments. However, if organic pollution
occurs in saturated environments, anaerobic degradation
will most likely predominate due to the low solubility
and slow mass transport of 02 in water. Aerobic
conditions can only be maintained in such environments
by intensive aeration; whereas anaerobic conditions
are ensured by adding readily biodegradable
organic matter resulting in rapid 02 uptake by heterotrophs.
As will be discussed later, the consumption
of oxygen by aerobes is often sufficient to create
anaerobic microniches even in macroenvironments that
are completely saturated with 02. In complex matrices
such as soil, sediments and biofilms, anaerobic and aerobic
microbial communities occur side by side (Kato
et al. 1993a; Tiedje et al. 1984).
The objectives of this review article are to contrast
the biodegradative limitations of anaerobic and
aerobic microbial consortia towards aromatic priority
pollutants. Evidence demonstrating that the combined
activity of both anaerobic and aerobic consortia can
bring about the complete degradation of recalcitrant
xenobiotic aromatics will be discussed. The combined
biodegradation can be achieved in sequenced periods
of operation or in reactors placed in series (Zitomer &
Speece 1993). However, since anaerobic microniches
are easily created and maintained in aerobic microbial
environments, the basis for the development of synchronous
anaerobic-aerobic bioremediation systems
are elaborated.
Microbial degradation of aromatics
General principles
Aromatic compounds are susceptible to biodegradation
under both aerobic and anaerobic conditions. In
the aerobic processes, molecular oxygen is involved in
two ways. Firstly, oxygen is incorporated in the aromatic
ring by means of mono- and dioxygenases prior
to ring-fission. Secondly, oxygen serves as the terminal
electron acceptor of the reducing equivalents generated
during the oxidation of the aromatic molecule.
Under anaerobic conditions on the other hand, biochemical
mechanisms which do not involve molecular
oxygen function in the break down of aromatic compounds.
As a consequence of this, some types of aromatic
compounds are difficult to degrade anaerobically,
in particular, aromatic compounds without functional
groups (benzene, toluene, naphthalene, etc.). However,
higher chlorinated aromatic compounds (e.g. hexachlorobenzene)
are degraded better under anaerobic
conditions. Different types of compounds can act as
alternative terminal electron acceptors in the absence
of 02, such as nitrate, sulfate, sulfur, oxidized metal
ions (e.g. Fe 3+ and Mn4+), protons and bicarbonate. 
49
Table 1. Sources of toxic anthropogenic aromatic pollution
Aromatic compounds Industrial sources
BTEX*
Styrene
PAH*
Alkylphenols
Aromatic sulfonates
Aromatic amines
Azo aromatics
Nitroaromatics
Chlorophenols & dioxins
Chloroaromatic hydrocarb, and PCB*
Fossil fuels, solvents, industrial feedstocks
Plastics
Fossil fuels, wood preservation
Surfactants, detergents
Surfactants, detergents, sulfite pulping, dyes
Pesticides, dyes, pigments, pharmaceuticals
Dyes
Explosives, pharmaceuticals, pesticides, dyes
Wood preservation, pesticides, pulp bleaching effluents
Pesticides, solvents, dielectric and hydraulic fluids
* BTEX = benzene, toluene, ethylbenzene and xylene; PAH = polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons;
PCB = polychlorinated biphenyls.
Table 2. Energetics of aerobic and anaerobic benzoate degradation
z~G m '(k J)*
Benzoate + 7.5 02 -+ 7 CO2 - 3174.6
Benzoate + 6 NO 3 -+ 7 CO2 + 3 N2 - 2977.3
Benzoate + 3.75 NO 3 -+ 7 CO2 + 3.75 NH4 + - 1864.3
Benzoate + 30 Fe 3+ ---+ 7 CO2 + 30 Fe 2+ - 3043.3
Benzoate + 3.75 SO4 a- ~ 7 CO2 + 3.75 HS- - 185.4
Benzoate + 15 S ° --+ 7 CO2 + 15 HS- - 35.8
Benzoate ~ 3.25 CO2 + 3.75 CH4 - 124.3
* Gibbs free energy values were calculated from data of Thauer et
al. (1977).
Proton and bicarbonate reduction are the primary electron
acceptors utilized in methanogenic environments
(Schink 1992). Phototrophic bacteria can also use aromatic
compounds as carbon and electron donors in
the absence of 02 if light is available. In this case,
the degradation product is biomass rather than carbon
dioxide (Evans & Fuchs 1988).
Thermodynamic considerations
The amount of energy that can be conserved by
microorganisms in the form of ATP or an ionic gradient
is dependent on the Gibbs free energy of degradation.
The Gibbs free energy change resulting from the
catabolism of a given aromatic compound is strongly
dependent on the nature of the terminal electron
acceptor. As an example, the Gibbs free energy
change is given in Table 2 for the complete oxidation
of benzoate to bicarbonate with different electron
acceptors. The amount of energy which is available
is highest under aerobic and under anaerobic
nitrate-reducing and iron-reducing conditions. However,
under sulfate- and sulfur-reducing conditions as
well as under methanogenic conditions, comparatively
less energy is available for the microorganisms. Consequently,
the molar cell yields under methanogenic and
sulfidogenic conditions are rather low. Energy conservation
can take place during electron transport to the
terminal electron acceptor at the cytoplasmic membrane.
The amount of energy which becomes available
when reducing equivalents (e.g. NADH) are channelled
to oxygen, nitrate or Fe 3+ is high. However,
when sulfate, sulfur or bicarbonate reduction are the
electron acceptors, much less energy is available to
drive electron transport phosphorylation (Thauer et al.
1977).
Biodegradation pathways
The aerobic and anaerobic biotransformation of aromatic
compounds has been reviewed extensively
(Fuchs et al. 1994; Haggblom 1992; Marvin-Sikkema
& Bont 1994; Smith 1994). In order to exemplify
differences between aerobic and anaerobic biotransformations
of aromatic compounds, pathways of phenol
and 3-chlorobenzoate biodegradation were chosen
for the sake of illustration. The pathways of aerobic
and anaerobic phenol degradation are compared
in Fig. 1. Aerobically, phenol is first converted to
catechol, a reaction which is catalyzed by a monooxygenase.
Subsequently, catechol is degraded via an 
50
©
%
COOl.-I ~-
02
cleavage
OH
o2~eta cleavage
HCOOH
cc:::o
suceinate
acetyl CoA
pyruvate
acetaldehyde
©
OH
Fig. 1.
CO 2
OH OH
COS-CoA
htermediates -¢
COS-.-CoA CO,%.CoA
Pathways involved in the aerobic and anaerobic degradation of phenol (Fuchs et al. 1994; Rochkind-Dubinsky et al. 1987).
ortho- or meta-fission to intermediates of the central
metabolism. The initial ring fission reactions are catalyzed
by dioxygenases. Benzoate is degraded in a
similar fashion. However, in this case protocatechuate
is the intermediate which is cleaved via ortho or metafission.
Anaerobically, phenol is catabolized quite differently.
So far, the pathways of degradation have
only been elucidated in detail with denitrifying bacteria
(Fuchs et al. 1994). Phenol is carboxylated first to 4-
hydroxybenzoate, a reaction in which phenylphosphate
is an intermediate (Lack & Fuchs 1994). Subsequently,
4-hydroxybenzoate is activated to 4-hydroxybenzoylCoA,
which is reductively dehydroxylated to benzoylCoA.
The aromatic ring is reduced (Koch & Fuchs
1992), and subsequently the ring is further metabolized
by fl-oxidation.
Figure 2 compares the pathways involved in the
degradation of 3-chlorobenzoate under aerobic and
methanogenic conditions. Aerobic microorganisms
attack the ring with oxygenases and the removal of
the chlorine atom occurs after ring fission. Typically,
in the anaerobic transformation of 3-chlorobenzoate
under methanogenic conditions, a consortium of bacteria
is involved (Mohn & Tiedje 1992). A dechlorinating
bacterium, Desulfomonile tiedjeii, was isolated
from a 3-chlorobenzoate-degrading methanogenic
consortia which was able to gain energy for growth
by reductive dechlorination. The reducing equivalents
needed for this reduction are obtained through interspecies
H2 transfer originating from another bacterium
in the consortium which oxidizes benzoate to acetate,
CO2 and hydrogen. A remarkable feature is that the 
51
,So
COOH
o@
02 C~" ) o C coo.
C~
maleyl acetate
/
OH
CO 2 02 CI -
600 2
D
T
H 2
Oo
O"
0
3H 2 + 00 2 - I,,,- 0.50H4+0.5002
3CH3COOH ~ 3CH 4 ÷ 300 2
Fig. 2. Pathways involved the degradation of 3-chlorobenzoate under aerobic and methanogenic conditions (Mohn & Tiedje 1992;
Rochkind-Dubinsky et al. 1987).
benzoate-degrading bacterium is only able to catabolize
benzoate when all the reducing equivalents (hydrogen
and/or formate) are consumed by the methanogens,
together with the dechlorinating bacterium.
Recalcitrance versus biodegradability
The accumulation of aromatic pollutants in the environment
indicates that these compounds are resistant
to biological attack. Several factors responsible for
their recalcitrance can be distinguished, having to do
with either the compounds' bioavailability or the intrinsic
limitations of the microorganisms involved in their
biodegradation. Additionally, recalcitrance can also be
attributed to modifications occurring in the environment
which link the aromatic pollutants irreversibly to
humus (e.g. 'bound residue').
Bioavailability
Non-hydrolyzable polymers
Bioavailability limitations can result from the poor
uptake of non-hydrolyzable polymers or from the
slow dissolution of highly apolar pollutants. Plastics
and lignin are perhaps the most typical examples of
non-hydrolyzable pollutants which are persistent to
biodegradation. In the case of plastics built out of aromatic
hydrocarbons (e.g. polystyrenes), no enzymes
are known which can break up the polymers extracellularly.
However, if microorganisms are offered
oligomeric pieces of the polymer which can passively
diffuse into the cell, then biodegradation does occur
(Cain 1992). Similarly, the natural random aromatic
polymer, lignin, is virtually impossible to degrade by
most microorganisms. The colour caused by lignin in
forest industry wastewaters is not removed by conven- 
52
tional aerobic (Walden 1980) nor by anaerobic (Sierra
et al. 1990) wastewater treatment methods. Only white
rot fungi (Kirk & Farrell 1987) and several actinomycetes
(Zimmermann 1990) which produce extracellular
ligninolytic enzymes that can attack the large aromatic
polymers oxidatively at a distance from the cell
are able to cause significant biodegradation of lignin.
Non-ligninolytic bacteria, however, are able to degrade
oligomeric fragments of lignin that are small enough
for cell uptake under both aerobic (Jokela et al. 1987)
and anaerobic conditions (Chen et al. 1985; Colberg &
Young 1985).
100~
8O
.~ 6o *o
4O
20
0 60
°
1 '0 20 3 '0 40 ' ' 50
% Chlorine in PC~ Mixture (w/w)
Poor dissolution of apolar compounds
Many aromatic pollutants such as polychlorinated aromatic
hydrocarbons and polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons
(PAH) are highly apolar, having both a low solubility
in water and a high tendency for strong adsorption
onto organic matter in soil and sediment matrices
(Means et al. 1980). The slow dissolution and desorption
of these compounds into the water phase has
often been found to be the rate limiting step in the
biodegradation kinetics (Parsons 1992; Volkering &
van Andel 1993; Weissenfels et al. 1992). Since the
recalcitrance in this case is due to a physical limitation
rather than a biological limitation, improvements in
the biodegradation of apolar compounds must first be
sought in increasing the bioavailability. Bioavailability
enhancement of PAH by adding surfactants (Aronstein
& Alexander 1993; Tiehm & Zumft 1992) or by
extracting the adsorbed pollutants from soil organic
matter with solvents (Weissenfels et al. 1992) has been
shown to greatly improve the rate of PAH biodegradation.
Biosurfactants produced by the microorganisms
can also enhance the rate of biodegradation (Oberbremet
et al. 1990).
Intrinsic limitations
Intrinsic recalcitrance refers to a limitation in the
biodegradative capacities of microorganisms. From an
environmental biotechnology point of view, a major
consideration is the metabolic capacities available in
either aerobic or anaerobic microbial communities. In
aerobic environments, microorganisms often utilize
oxygenases to initiate an electrophilic attack on aromatic
molecules. Consequently, molecules substituted
with numerous electron-withdrawing substitutions
such as chloro, nitro and azo groups are quite resistant
to aerobic biodegradation (Knackmuss 1992; Okey &
Fig. 3. Thepercentagebiodegradationofpolychlorinatedbiphenyls
(PCB) in a laboratory-scale semicontinuous activated sludge reactor
as a function of the chlorine content of the commercial PCB mixture
(Tucker et al. 1975). The biphenyl or PCB loading was 0.333 mg/L.d
in the activated sludge reactor with a steady-state sludge concentration
of 2.5 g SS/L and which was acclimatized to the PCB mixtures
for 5 months.
Bogan 1965), as has been observed for purified dioxygenases
(Dorn & Knackmuss 1978; Knackmuss 1981).
In anaerobic environments where a nucleophilic mechanism
of attack is common, the presence of these
electron-withdrawing groups is favorable for the initial
reductive attack (Bosma et al. 1988; Dolfing &
Harrison 1993; Knackmuss 1992). In fact during the
anaerobic biodegradation of aromatics, bacteria prepare
the compounds for ring reduction by simplifying
them to benzoate and finally to benzoyl-CoA (Fig. 1),
a compound of high electrophilic character (Fuchs et
al. 1994). On the other hand, electron-donating functional
groups, such as amino groups, are troublesome
for the nucleophilic attack of anaerobes (Knackmuss
1992; Schink 1988b). Also the lack of any functional
groups has been a characteristic associated with the
recalcitrance of hydrocarbons in anaerobic environments
(Schink 1985; Schink 1988a), explaining the
occurrence of simple unsaturated hydrocarbons in geologically
preserved anaerobic sediments. Finally, the
presence of functional groups can sometimes interfere
with the activity of enzymes by creating a steric hinderance.

Electron-withdrawing chloro groups
Aerobes. Polychlorinated aromatic hydrocarbons
such as chlorobenzenes, polychlorinated biphenyls,
dioxins and halogenated aromatic hydrocarbon pesticides
are extremely recalcitrant to aerobic biodegradation.
Polychlorinated phenols and chlorinated lignin 
D
3,5O
300
25O
200
150
IO0
59
O
I 2
h~ of N'~o Groups
o
/x
o
3
Fig,. 4. The effect of the number of nitro-substitutions on the rate
of nitro-aromatic compound reduction as indicated by the rate of
hydrogen gas uptake in anaerobically incubated cell free extracts of
Veillonella alcalescens (McCormick et al. 1976). Legend: nitrobenzenes,
(o); nitrotoluenes, (m); nitrobenzoates, (~); nitrophenols,
(0),
fragments have also often been found to be troublesome
for aerobic biotreatment systems although some
aerobic enrichment cultures have been reported which
rapidly biodegrade pentachlorophenol in continuous
biofilm reactors.
Hexachlorobenzene, pentachlorobenzene, tetrachlorobenzene
and two isomers of trichlorobenzene
(1,2,3- and 1,3,5-trichloro) were shown to resist
degradation in aerobic aquifer sediments, while lower
mono- and dichlorinated benzenes were readily
removed (Bosma et al. 1994). 1,2,3- and 1,2,4-
trichlorobenzenes incubated in aerobic soil were slowly
mineralized (Marinucci & Bartha 1979) and 1,2,4-
trichlorobenzene was not removed in aerobic sediments
even after 2 years of acclimatization (Van der
Meer et al. 1987). In experiments with aerobic activated
sludge grown on benzene, no respiration of
1,2,4-trichlorobenzene was observed but O2-uptake
did occur when mono-chlorobenzene was tested as
a substrate instead (Okey & Bogan 1965). Similarly,
lab-scale aerobic activated sludge wastewater treatment
plants were found to be able to eliminate monoand
dichlorobenzene but not 1,2,4-trichlorobenzene
(Weber-Jr et al. 1987). Pseudomonas strains which
were isolated in chlorobenzene enrichment cultures
were able to mineralize dichlorobenzenes and 1,2,4-
trichlorobenzene. One strain was even able to metabolize
1,2,4,5-tetrachlorobenzene, but higher chlorinated
benzenes were left unutilized (Sander et al. 1991).
These results indicate that penta- and hexachlorobenzene
are definitely not biodegraded in aerobic environ-
53
ments. The biodegradation of tetra- and trichlorobenzene
may occur but it is certainly not reliable. On the
other hand, mono- and dichlorobenzenes are readily
degraded by aerobic bacteria (Schraa et al. 1986).
Polychlorinated biphenyls (PCB) show a similar
aerobic biodegradability pattern as chlorobenzenes.
Experiments in which PCB contaminated sediments
are incubated aerobically, have shown that congeners
containing 3 or more chloro groups are not removed
while the mono- and dichlorinated biphenyls are eliminated
(Anid et al. 1991). The biodegradability of
different PCB mixtures in aerobic activated sludge
was shown to be inversely related to their average
chlorine number (Tucker et al. 1975), as is shown
in Fig. 3. It was concluded that mono- and dichlorinated
congeners were readily biodegradable while
those with 5 or more chlorines were completely recalcitrant.
Several attempts have been made to isolate
aerobic bacteria which can degrade higher chlorinated
biphenyls. Acinetobacter sp. strain P6 could
degrade congeners with up to 4 chloro groups but
pentachlorinated biphenyl was persistent (Furukawa
et al. 1981). An Alcaligenes strain which utilized
dichlorinated biphenyls respired tri- and tetrachlorobiphenyls
only slightly faster than the respiration of
background endogenous substrate (Yagi & Sudo 1980).
The best results so far have been obtained with Alcaligenes
eutrophus which was able to degrade at least
some congeners with up to 6 chlorine groups but not
higher (Bedard et al. 1987). Nonetheless, the results
obtained in natural mixed cultures in the environment
and wastewater treatment plants indicate that only
mono- and dichlorinated biphenyls can be expected
to be reliably removed under aerobic conditions. Little
is known about the fate of dioxins in natural microbial
communities. In one study, the aerobic chloroaromatic
hydrocarbon-degrading Alcaligenes sp. strain JB 1
was unable to degrade tetrachlorodibenzo[p]dioxin but
was able to degrade lower chlorinated dioxins (Parsons
1992). Several other aerobic bacteria have also
been reported that are able to metabolize monochlorinated
dioxins but there are no reports indicating aerobic
biodegradation of polychlorinated dioxins. These
observations serve as an indication that the same pattern
of biodegradability may apply to dioxins as to
chlorobenzenes and PCB's.
Finally, 1,1,1-trichloro-2,2'-bis(p-chlorophenyl)ethane
(DDT) and the related methoxychlor 1,1,1-trichloro-
2,2'-bis(p-methoxyphenyl)ethane are typical examples
of halogenated aromatic hydrocarbon pesticides which
are recalcitrant to biodegradation under aerobic condi- 
54
tions. These compounds have been shown to persist
in aerobic incubations with soils (Fogel et al. 1982;
Guenzi & Beard 1968) and in a BOD test (Subba-Rao
& Alexander 1977). Lower chlorinated diphenylethane
or diphenylmethane derivatives in turn were shown to
be biodegraded by the aerobic bacterium Alcaligenes
sp. strain IsoDPM4 (Beunick & Rehm 1988) and they
were also respired during a BOD test (Subba-Rao &
Alexander 1977).
Polychlorinated phenols, in contrast to the aromatic
hydrocarbons, do seem to be degraded at rapid rates
by enrichment cultures or isolated strains (Puhakka &
Jarvinen 1992; Valo et al. 1990). However, in complex
wastewater matrices such as bleaching effluents
the removal of polychlorinated phenols has generally
been troublesome, although lower chlorinated phenols
are more readily removed (Leuenberger et al.
1985; Salkinoja-Salonen et al. 1984). Similarly poor
biodegradation of pentachlorophenol (PCP) has been
observed during aerobic soil bioremediation experiments
with the indigenous microflora (Briglia et al.
1994; Mikesell & Boyd 1988). Better results under
aerobic conditions were obtained by bioaugmentation
with a Rhodococcus PCP degrading bacterial strain
(Briglia et al. 1994).
Chlorinated lignin fragments are responsible for
most of the adsorbable organic halogens (AOX) in
bleaching effluents. The partial removal of AOX during
aerobic wastewater treatment of bleaching effluents has
generally been found to be low (Ferguson 1994; Jokela
et al. 1993).
Anaerobes. In contrast to the oxygenolytic approach
of aerobes, anaerobic microorganisms are able
to reductively dechlorinate polychlorinated aromatic
hydrocarbons (Haggblom 1992; Mohn & Tiedje 1992).
The highly electrophilic character of the multiple chlorine
substitutions increases the favorableness of this
type of nucleophilic attack (Dolfing & Harrison 1993).
Anaerobic enrichment cultures were able to dechlorinate
hexa- and pentachlorobenzene 2 to 3 times faster
than tetra- and trichlorobenzenes (Holliger et al. 1992).
In many cases, the reductive dechlorination can also
be carried out abiotically with reduced metal cofactors
(e.g. vitamin B12 and factor F430) of important
enzymes involved in anaerobic metabolism (Wackett
& Schanke 1992). Reductive dehalogenation of polychlorinated
aromatic hydrocarbons does not result in
the mineralization of these compounds. Instead, lower
chlorinated analogues which are less readily reduced
are the anaerobically recalcitrant end products of this
biotransformation. In contrast to the hydrocarbons, the
di- and monochlorinated phenols, which often accumulate
from the reductive dehalogenation of polychlorinated
phenols, have in some cases been shown
to undergo further metabolism to mineralized products.

While hexachlorobenzene is completely recalcitrant
in aerobic conditions, this compound is readily
dechlorinated by anaerobic methanogenic consortia
present in aquifer, lake and river sediments (Bosma
et al. 1994) as well as in anaerobically incubated soil
(Ramanand et al. 1993) and in continuous anaerobic
biofilm reactors (Fathepure & Vogel 1991). In these
experiments, tri, di- and mono-chlorinated benzenes
accumulated as the end products of reductive dechlorination.
When tri- and dichlorobenzenes were tested,
these compounds were also biotransformed and
chlorobenzene was found to be the most predominant
end product (Bosma et al. 1988; Bosma et al. 1994).
Tri- and dichlorobenzenes were not degraded in sediments
when incubated under denitrifying conditions
(Bosma et al. 1994). Chlorobenzene was not found
to be metabolized under anaerobic conditions when
it was tested in biodegradability assays (Battersby &
Wilson 1989; Bosmaet al. 1994; Horowitzet al. 1981).
In contrast, chlorotoluene appeared to be converted to
toluene (Ramanand et al. 1993), indicating that at least
some monochlorinated aromatic hydrocarbons are susceptible
to anaerobic biodegradation.
Highly chlorinated PCBs which are persistent in
aerobic environments, are dechlorinated when PCBpolluted
sediments are incubated anaerobically (Alder
et al. 1993; Anid et al. 1991; Quensen-III et al. 1988;
Van Dort & Bedard 1991). Reductive dechlorination
primarily takes place in the meta- and para-positions
(Alder et al. 1993; Quensen-III et al. 1988) and as
a consequence there is a tendency for the accumulation
of ortho substituted PCBs possessing one, two
or three chlorine groups. However, there is at least
one report in which ortho dechlorination was shown
to occur (Van Dort & Bedard 1991). PCBs with as
few as three chlorine groups can be dechlorinated in
anaerobic sediments (Boyle et al. 1993). Even 4,4'-
dichlorobiphenyl was reductively dechlorinated to 4-
chlorobiphenyl and biphenyl when this compound was
incubated anaerobically with activated sludge, soil or
sediments (Mavoungou et al. 1991). However, in complex
mixtures of PCBs, most mono- and dichlorinated
congeners are recalcitrant to anaerobic biodegradation
(Anid et al. 1991). Under sulfate reducing conditions,
little PCB degradation occurs (Alder et al. 1993). 
While dioxins with four chloro groups were not
metabolized by aerobic bacteria, there are several
reports that anaerobic consortia are able to dechlorinate
highly chlorinated dioxins. Heptachlorinated dioxin
was dechlorinated to hexa- and pentachlorodibenzo(p)dioxins
in river and aquifer sediments (Adriaens
& Grbic-Galic 1992). Methanogenic enrichment
cultures, acclimatized to the dechlorination of
hexachlorobenzene, were able to convert 1,2,3,4-
tetrachlorodibenzo(p)dioxin to tri-, di- and even monochlorinated
dioxins (Toussaint et al. 1992). DDT which
was also recalcitrant in aerobic environments, could be
metabolized to lower chlorinated metabolites in anaerobic
incubations of sewage sludge or soil (Castro &
Toshida 1971; Pfaender & Alexander 1972).
Like the polychlorinated aromatic hydrocarbons,
polychlorinated phenols are readily biodegraded in
anaerobic conditions. Pentachlorophenol (PCP) has
been shown in several studies to be reliably eliminated
in continuous anaerobic upward-flow sludge
blanket reactors with granular biofilms (Hendriksen
& Ahring 1993; Wu et al. 1993). Specific activities
of up to 15 mg PCP g-i volatile suspended
solids d -I have been observed (Wu et al. 1993). In
these studies, 14C-PCP was mineralized to radiolabelled
CO2 and CH4. However, when digested anaerobic
domestic sludge (DADS) was used as the inoculure,
PCP was not fully mineralized (Hendriksen &
Ahring 1993; Madsen & Aamand 1991; Mikesell &
Boyd 1988). Meta- and para-substituted tri-, di- and
mono-chlorophenols accumulated, in agreement with
the fact that DADS is typically only naturally acclimatized
to ortho-dechlorination (Boyd & R 1984; Hrudey
et al. 1987; Shelton & Tiedje 1984). Ortho dechlorination
was shown to be the most favorable reduction
expected, based on the electrochemical characteristics
of chlorophenol molecules (Cozza & Woods
1992). Significant mineralization of PCP occurred
when a mixture of DADS was used that was composed
of sludges which were individually acclimatized
for two years to each of the three mono-chlorophenol
isomers (Mikesell & Boyd 1986). This result indicates
that several specific dechlorinating microorganisms
were involved in the total biodegradation of PCR
The selection pressure may not always enrich all of
the dechlorinators required for complete chlorophenol
dechlorination and subsequent mineralization. Anaerobic
studies conducted with either trichlorophenols
or mixtures of chlorophenols have generally resulted
in partial degradation with concomitant accumulation
of 3,4-dichlorophenol, 3,5-dichlorophenol, 3-
55
chlorophenol and/or 4-chlorophenol (Kafkewitz et al.
1992; Mohn & Kennedy 1992; Woods et aI. 1989). In
contrast, 2,6-dichlorophenol and 2-chlorophenol are
intermediates which are reliably mineralized, indicating
the facile dominance of ortho-dechlorinators. In a
similar fashion, chlorinated veratroles, guaiacols and
catechols are only partially degraded with accumulation
of 3,4-dichlorocatechol, 3,5-dichlorocatechol, 3-
chlorocatechol and/or 4-chlorocatechol (Allard et al.
1991; Neilson et al. 1987; Woods et al. 1989). Sulfate
is reported to inhibit dechlorination of chlorophenols in
methanogenic consortia (Gibson & Sulfita 1990; Madsen
& Aamand 1991; Mohn & Kennedy 1992). Sulfate
reduction apparently outcompetes dechlorination
in the uptake of interspecies H2 as an electron-donor
(Madsen & Aamand 1991).
Aside from simple chloroaromatic compounds, the
chlorinated lignin fragments in chlorine bleaching
wastewaters are also subject to reductive dechlorination
(Ferguson 1994; Fitzsimons et al. 1990). Since
many of the fragments have a size in excess of cell
penetration, it appears that the reducing conditions prevailing
in the anaerobic environment can cause chemical
dechlorination (Fitzsimons et al. 1990) or a biogenic
reduced cofactor such as vitamin B 12 is involved
which is known to occur extracellularly (Mazumder et
al. 1987). Anaerobic or facultative treatment systems
commonly outperform the aerobic activated sludge
process in the removal of AOX from bleaching effluents
(Ferguson 1994; Jokela et al. 1993).
Electron-withdrawing nitro groups
Aerobes. Polynitro aromatics are a troublesome family
of pollutants for aerobic biotreatment systems.
No or little biodegradation of 2,6-, 2,4-dinitrotoluene
(DNT) and 2,4,6-trinitrotoluene (TNT) occurred in
activated sludge during aerobic incubations (Hallas
& Alexander 1983; Liu et al. 1984; McCormick et
al. 1976; Pitter 1976). Likewise no elimination of
dinoseb (2-sec-butyl-4-,6-dinitrophenol), a pesticide,
was observed during long term incubations in aerobic
soil (Kaake et al. 1992). Nor was it possible to enrich
microorganisms capable of converting dinoseb in well
aerated (shaken) cultures (Stevens et al. 1991). Dinitrophenol
and dinitrobenzoate were degraded slowly in
aerobic activated sludge (Pitter 1976). These polynitro
aromatics however cannot be considered as being
completely recalcitrant to aerobic bacteria since, several
aerobic bacterial strains have been isolated with
exceptional biodegradative capacities towards polyni- 
56
tro aromatics. Some of the strains initiate the attack
by reducing the nitro groups despite the aerobic conditions
(Hallas & Alexander 1983; Marvin-Sikkema
& Bont 1994; McCormick et al. 1978). Ligninolytic
fungi also use this strategy for the initial attack
of DNT and TNT (Stahl & Aust 1993; Valli et al.
1992). Other strains have even been identified which
can attack the molecules with their oxygenases despite
the presence of two or even three electron-withdrawing
nitro groups (Marvin-Sikkema & de Bont 1994). In
contrast to polynitro aromatics, simple compounds
such as mononitroaromatics, nitroanilines, nitrophenols
and nitrobenzoates are readily metabolized by
aerobic natural mixed cultures (Hallas & Alexander
1983; Malaney 1960; Pitter 1976) and by bacterial
isolates (Marvin-Sikkema & de Bont 1994).
Anaerobes. Dinitrobenzenes and dinitrotoluenes
which typically persist in aerobic natural mixed cultures,
were found to be biotransformed if air was
excluded from the incubation (Hallas & Alexander
1983; Liu et al. 1984). TNT biodegradation readily
occurs in soil and sludge under anaerobic conditions
(Boopathy et al. 1993; Funk et al. 1993). Anaerobic
degradation of TNT proceeds via the reduction
of the nitro groups, yielding triaminotoluene (Funk et
al. 1993; McCormick et al. 1976) and deep degradation
results in the formation of methylphloroglucinol
and p-cresol (Funk et al. 1993). Enrichment
cultures could be obtained in anaerobic conditions
which converted dinoseb to acetic acid (Stevens et
al. 1991). Dinoseb was also successfully eliminated
by anaerobic soil bioremediation (Kaake et al.
1992). As more and more nitro groups are placed on
the ring, the increasing electrophilic character of the
molecule contributes to increasing rates of reduction
as shown in Figure 4 for cell-free-extracts of the anaerobe,
Veillonella alcalescens (McCormick et al. 1976).
Nonetheless, most mono-nitro aromatics, including
nitrotoluene and nitrobenzene, are reliably converted
to their corresponding aromatic amines in anaerobic
sludge or anaerobically incubated sewage (Dickel
et al. 1993; Hallas & Alexander 1983; O'Connor &
Young 1993) as well as in pure cultures of strict anaerobes
(Gorontzy et al. 1993). Lysed cells and cell free
extracts of methanogens were also able to carry out
this reduction (Gorontzy et al. 1993). Both 2- and
4-nitrophenol are mineralized in methanogenic sludge
(Battersby &Wilson 1989; Boyd et al. 1983; O'Connor
& Young 1993; Shelton & Tiedje 1984) as well as 2-
nitrobenzoate (Horowitz et al. 1981).
Electron-withdrawing azo groups
Aerobes. The azo dyes, which comprise the most
important family of compounds used as textile dyes,
have been found to be quite recalcitrant to aerobic
biodegradation. The highly electrophilic azo bond
must be cleaved for dye decolorization to take place.
Decolorization of the dyes does not readily occur in
aerobic activated sludge (Pagga & Brown 1986; Shaul
et al. 1991). Of more than 100 dyes tested, only a
very few were actually biodegraded. Isolated aerobic
bacteria were also not able to degrade azo dyes when
incubated aerobically (Haug et al. 1991; Wuhrmann et
al. 1980). In special cases, aerobic bacterial isolates
were able to adapt to the cleavage of carboxylated azo
dyes after 100 to 400 generations (Kulla 1981). These
isolates were shown to possess O2-tolerant azoreductases
with narrow substrate spectra (Zimmermann et
al. 1984).
Anaerobes. In contrast to aerobic conditions, almost
all azo dyes tested are decolourized by anaerobic
sludge (Brown & Hamburger 1987; Brown &
Laboureur 1983a; Carliell et al. 1994; Meyer 1981),
anaerobic sediments (Carliell et al. 1994; Weber &
Wolfe 1987) and by pure cultures or enrichment cultures
of bacteria incubated anaerobically (Haug et al.
1991; Meyer 1981; Ryan et al. 1968). Dye decolorization
also occurred in continuous anaerobic reactors
with immobilized biomass (Glaesser et al. 1992;
Jianrong et al. 1994; Zaoyan et al. 1992). The dye
redox potential was found to be an important factor
determining the rate of decolorization in anaerobically
incubated cells of the bacteria Proteus vulgaris
(Dubin & Wright 1975). The reduction of the dye causes
the cleavage of the azo bond, consequently aromatic
amines are the typical products of this bioconversion.
The products mostly depend on the rings present in
the parent compound. Typical examples of cleavageproducts
which accumulate as a result of the anaerobic
biotransformation of azo-dyes are shown in Table 3.
Electron donating amino groups
Aerobes. The presence of amino electron donating
groups is expected to facilitate the electrophilic attack
of aromatics. Most of the typical aromatic amine
end-products from the anaerobic metabolism of nitroand
azo-aromatic pollutants are eliminated in aerobic
biodegradability tests. Simple aromatic amines such as
aniline and aminotoluene are commonly found to be
biodegraded by aerobic sludge (Brown & Laboureur 
1983b; Dickel et al. 1993; Malaney 1960). The more
complex azo dye cleavage products, such as the naphthylic
and biphenylic amines listed in Table 3, are
also degraded in aerobic activated sludge (Brown &
Hamburger 1987; Malaney 1960) or by bacterial isolates
from enrichment cultures (Kulla 1981). Many
dye cleavage products are sulfonated, such as the
aminobenzene-sulfonate or the aminonapthylsulfonate
derivatives. These too have been shown to be biodegraded
by aerobic activated sludge (Brown & Hamburger
1987; Malaney 1960), aerobic enrichment cultures
(Glaesser et al. 1992; Haug et al. 1991) and isolated
aerobic bacteria (Thurnheer et al. 1986; Thurnheer
et al. 1988).
Anaerobes. Both nitro- and azo-aromatics are highly
electrophilic compounds that are easily metabolized
under anaerobic conditions yielding amino-aromatics.
However, the electron donating amino groups are
expected to pose a serious problem to further reductive
biotransformations by anaerobes. This hypothesis
is confirmed by the fact that most of the aromatic
amines listed in Table 3 were not found to be biodegradable
in tests with anaerobic sludge (Brown & Hamburger
1987). The simplest aromatic amine, aniline,
accumulates in stoichiometric yields when anaerobic
microbial communities are supplied with azobenzene
(Weber & Wolfe 1987) or nitrobenzene (Dickel et al.
1993). This is not surprising since aniline has consistently
been found to be completely recalcitrant in
methanogenic consortia (Battersby & Wilson 1989; De
et al. 1994; Schink 1988b). There is however, evidence
for aniline biodegradation by sulfate reducing bacteria
(Schink 1988b) and in mixed cultures under denitrilying
conditions (De et al. 1994). Aniline degradation
by a methanogenic consortium has also been claimed
(Schink 1991).
Aromatic amines with carboxy, hydroxy and
methoxy substitutions are potentially mineralizable
in methanogenic consortia. Biodegradability tests of
these compounds in anaerobic sludge indicate that 2-
and 4-aminophenol are sometimes mineralized (Battersby
& Wilson 1989; O'Connor& Young 1993) and
other times are left unmetabolized (Battersby & Wilson
1989; O'Connor & Young 1993). Both anthranilate
(2-aminobenzoate) and 4-aminobenzoate are reliably
mineralized (Bollag & Kaiser 1991; Horowitz
et al. 1981; Schink 1988b; Shelton & Tiedje 1984),
but there are mixed reports on the biodegradability
of 3-aminobenzoate (Battersby & Wilson 1989;
Horowitz et al. 1981). The elimination of 4,4'-
57
diamino-3,3'-dimethoxybiphenyl was also reported in
anaerobic sludge (Brown & Hamburger 1987). Nitroor
chloroanilines may be subject to anaerobic biotransformations
involving reduction of the electrophilic
groups (Gorontzy et al. 1993; McCormick et al. 1976;
Struijs & Rogers 1989). Finally, a number of Nsubstituted
aromatics having a structure similar to the
naturally occurring amino acid, tryptophan, such as
indole, indolyl-acetate, pyridine, dipicolinate, quinoline
and isoquinoline are also often found to be biodegraded
under anaerobic conditions (Bollag & Kaiser
1991; Grbic-Galic 1990; Schink 1988b).
Lack of oxygenated functional groups
Aerobes. The lack of oxygen containing functional
groups is not a problem for aerobes which possess
oxygenases that can easily incorporate oxygen into the
molecule (Smith 1994). Simple aromatic hydrocarbons
such as benzene, toluene, naphthalene and biphenyl
are consistently degraded in aerobic microbial communities
in sludge, soil and sediments (Bosma et al.
1994; Malaney 1960; Mihelcic & Luthy 1988a; Okey
& Bogan 1965). The recalcitrant behaviour of complex
aromatic hydrocarbons of four or more rings can mostly
attributed to their low bioavailability, rather than an
intrinsic limitation in the biodegradative capacity of
oxygenases.
Anaerobes. The lack of polar functional groups on
aromatic hydrocarbons was initially associated with
recalcitrance in anaerobic environments. This belief
was based on frequent observations that simple aromatic
hydrocarbons were not degraded in methanogenic
sludge and methanogenic sediments (Battersby & Wilson
1989; Bosma et al. 1994; Horowitz et al. 1981;
Mihelcic & Luthy 1988a; Schink 1985). However,
this view must now be modified since several
reports have documented slow toluene and o-xylene
biodegradation in enrichment cultures derived from
both methanogenic (Edwards & Grbic-Galic 1994;
Grbic-Galic 1990; Vogel & Grbic-Galic 1986) and
sulfate reducing aquifer sediments (Beller et al. 1992;
Edwards et al. 1992). Under denitrifying conditions,
toluene and xylenes are degraded faster (Evans et al.
1991; Hutchins 1993; Zeyer et al. 1986). Also the
biodegradation of PAH compounds, naphthalene and
acenaphthalene, has been observed in denitrifying conditions
(Grbic-Galic 1990; Mihelcic & Luthy 1988a;
Mihelcic & Luthy 1988b). Regardless of whether
NO 3, SO]- or CO2 is the electron acceptor, ben- 
58
zene biodegradation is often not observed (Bosma et
al. 1994; Edwards et al. 1992; Hutchins 1993); however
there are some reports of its biodegradation in
methanogenic and denitrifying consortia (Grbic-Galic
1990; Vogel & Grbic-Galic 1986). The first oxygenated
metabolites of toluene biodegradation were shown to
be either p-cresol (Vogel & Grbic-Galic 1986) or benzyl
alcohol (Edwards et al. 1994). The incorporated
oxygen was derived from H20 (Vogel & Grbic-Galic
1986).
Polymerization
Under aerobic conditions, a third type of recalcitrance
can be recognized, namely, the tendency of certain
compounds susceptible to free radical reactions to
undergo oxidative coupling. These coupling reactions
can result in the formation of recalcitrant humic-like
polymers or the irreversible covalent binding of the
pollutant into soil humus (e.g. bound residue). The
high MW humus polymers have a remarkable stability
in the environment with residence times exceeding 500
years (Stevenson 1982). Pollutants which are susceptible
to these polymerization reactions include polyhydroxylated
phenols, chlorophenols, nitroaromatics and
aromatic amines.
Phenols with ortho substituted hydroxy groups,
particularly trihydroxybenzenes, are extremely susceptible
to polymerization reactions, Pyrogallol, catechol,
catechin and condensed tannins are rapidly autoxidized
to darkly colored polymers in mild alkaline conditions
(Field & Lettinga 1989; Field & Lettinga 1991; Field
et al. 1989; Field et al. 1990). Catechin and condensed
tannins are also readily autoxidatively polymerized
in mildly acid to neutral conditions (Das 1969;
Field & Lettinga 1991). The aerobic biodegradability
of these compounds was limited due to the formation
of humic-like polymers which were not further
metabolized (Das 1969; Field & Lettinga 1991); however,
catechin was shown to be degraded when incubated
anaerobically (Das 1969). The COD of pyrogallol
(1,2,3-trihydroxybenzene), which is rapidly metabolized
in anaerobic conditions (Field & Lettinga 1987;
Horowitz et al. 1981; Kaiser & Hanselmann 1982;
Schink & Pfennig 1982), was found to persist for more
than 28 days in aerobic activated sludge (Pitter 1976),
probably due to its rapid polymerization.
Pollutants in the environment will also be exposed
to phenol oxidizing enzymes, such as tyrosinases, laccases
and peroxidases, of plants, fungi and actinomycetes
(Sjoblad & Bollag 1981). Peroxidases have
been shown to occur in soil (Bollag et al. 1987).
When these enzymes are involved, a much broader
range of substrates can be expected to be susceptible
to oxidative coupling even under mildly acidic conditions.
Chlorophenols are readily copolymerized into
humus with phenol oxidizing enzymes as was demonstrated
both in vitro (Bollag et al. 1977; Hatcher et
al. 1993; Maloney et al. 1986) and during soil microcosm
studies (Cheng et al. 1983) (Fig. 5). Even PCP
was converted into bound residue in soil organic matter,
when PCP-polluted soils were inoculated with a
white-rot fungus (Lamar et al. 1990). The formation of
polymerized products was also noted when chlorophenols
were incubated with lignin peroxidase of whiterot
fungi (Joshi & Gold 1993). The evidence for
chlorohumus products resulting from oxidative coupling
is based on the mass spectrometric identification
of oligomeric intermediates and the incorporation
of ring-labelled 14C into high MW humic polymers.
Coupling is not only mediated by phenol oxidizing
enzymes, and 2,4,6-trichlorophenol was slowly converted
to a dimer product by autoxidation in mildly
alkaline conditions (Hodin et al. 1991).
Chlorohumus polymers prepared from the enzymatic
coupling of chlorophenols were found to be poorly
biodegradable when incubated with natural mixed
cultures of soil (Dec & Bollag 1988). These high MW
compounds are non-toxic; consequently, polymerization
of chlorophenols has been found to cause their
detoxification (Bollag et al. 1988; Lyr 1963). However,
it should be noted that the initial steps in the oxidative
coupling of chlorophenolic pollutants can possibly lead
to dioxin formation. For example, minor but significant
yields of dioxins were produced from chlorophenols
when incubated with various peroxidases (Maloney et
al. 1986; Oberg et al. 1990) (Fig. 5).
Nitroaromatic pollutants have repeatedly been
reported to undergo polymerization reactions under
aerobic conditions (Crawford 1993; Marvin-Sikkema
& Bont 1994). The reactive sites are presumably
hydroxyamino and amino-groups resulting from the
reduction of a nitro group. The identification of tetranitroazoxytoluene
and dinitro-azoxytoluene intermediates
derived from TNT and DNT during aerobic
biodegradation, respectively, provides evidence for the
initial steps in the polymerization (Kaplan & Kaplan
1982; McCormick et al. 1976; McCormick et al.
1978) (Fig. 5). The incorporation of these compounds
into humic macropolymers and bound residue in large
yields has been confirmed by 14C labelling as well
as by infrared spectra characteristics of the polymers 
Cl
OH
CI
2,4,5-trichlorophenol
CI CI
2,3,7.8- cibenzo-p-d~oxin
59
OH 3
NO2~ NO2
NO 2
2,4,6-trinitrot oluer~
NO2 0 " NO2
OH 3 NZ N CH 3
N NO 2
2,2',6,6'-tetranitro-4,4'-azoxytoluene
OH
2-chlorophenol
OH OH
OH OH
NH 2 NH 2
NH
4-chloroaniline
CI
Fig.5. The polymerization ofaromatic pollutants in aerobic environments. A. toxic intermediates producedin the early stages ofpolymerization.
B. oligomeric intermediates illustrating the structure of high MW polymers generated after extensive oxidation. References: conversion of
trichlorophenol to dioxins (Oberg et al. 1990); conversion of trinitrotoluene to tetranitroazoxytnluene (Kaplan & Kaplan 1982; McCormick et
al. t976; McCormick et al. 1978); polymerization of chlorophenol (Bollag et al. 1977); polymerization of chloroaniline (Chang & Bumpus
1993).
(Carpenter et al. 1978; Funk et al. 1993; Kaplan &
Kaplan 1982). Likewise, the polymerization ofdinoseb
to brown precipitates under aerobic conditions was also
noted (Stevens et al. 1991).
Aromatic amines are perhaps the most susceptible
class of compounds among the aromatic pollutants for
coupling reactions. Peroxidases, laccases and tyrosinases
from plants and fungi are known to rapidly polymerize
a broad spectrum of aromatic amines to darkly 
60
CI
Cl-@OH
CI
2,4,6-trlchlorophenol
ANAEROBIC
CI ~- OH
4-chlorophenol
AEROBIC
CO 2, H20, HCl
Cl CI
CI ~ el
CI CI
hexachlorobenzene
IPCI

1,2-dichlorobenzene
-~ CO 2, H20, HCI
.o2
nitrobenzene
N.2 )
aniline
-~ C02, H20, NH 3
NO 2
CI -@ OH
4--chloro-2--nitrophenol
NH 2 ,...--(
CI/(,~k_ OH
4-cNoro-2-aminophenol
CO 2, H20, HCI, NH 3
COOH
808~ N: N-@ OH
Mordant-Yellow-3
COOH
NH2 -~- OH
5-aminosalicylate
--< S03 ~ "NH2
6-amino-2-sulfonylnaphthalene
CO 2, H20, NH 3
CO 2, H20. NH 3 H2S04
Fig. 6. Examples illustrating the sequenced anaerobic-aerobic biodegradation of environmental pollutants cited in Table 4.
colored products that ultimately precipitate out of solution
if the oxidation is continued (Claus & Filip 1990;
Klibanov et al. 1980; Sjoblad & Bollag 1977) (Fig. 5).
Anilines were also polymerized by lignin peroxidase
and whole cultures of white-rot fungi (Chang & Bumpus
1993). Addition of chloroanilines to soil microcosms
resulted in the formation of chloro-azobenzenes
and chloro-azoxybenzenes (Bartha et al. 1968; Freitag
et al. 1984), which is indicative of the first steps in
the polymerization that finally leads to bound residue
(Berry & Boyd 1985; Bollag et al. 1983; Freitag et al.
1984; Tatsumi et al. 1994). Also some aromatic amines
resulting from the cleavage of azo dyes are potentially
susceptible to oxidative coupling. Sulfanilic acid, arising
from the cleavage of Orange-I, was polymerized in
aerobic enrichment cultures (Kulla 1981). Aminophenols
are rapidly autoxidized, 4-chloro-2-aminophenol
was oxidized to dark non-biodegradable polymers at a
rate of 12 #M d -1 in sterile pH 6.8 medium (Beunink
& Rehm 1990).
Sequenced anaerobic-aerobic systems
In the previous section we have learned that there are
three major factors related to recalcitrance of aromatic
pollutants in the environment. The choice of aerobic
and anaerobic biotreatment systems cannot be used
to influence the first factor, bioavailability, but it can
be used to overcome the recalcitrance caused by the
two other factors, namely, the intrinsic biodegradative
limitations and the susceptibility for polymerization.
Of particular interest is the fact that many compounds
which are difficult to degrade aerobically, seem to be
readily biotransformed anaerobically. In turn, the products
of the anaerobic biotransformation resist further 
anaerobic mineralization; yet, they are good substrates
for aerobic biodegradation. Thus for the total mineralization
of many recalcitrant pollutants, a sequenced
anaerobic-aerobic treatment strategy should be sought
which uses the best of both worlds (Zitomer & Speece
1993).
Sequenced biodegradation
Table 4 summarizes the studies reported in the literature
in which enhanced biodegradation of recalcitrant
pollutants was obtained by sequencing the anaerobic
and aerobic biodegradative capacities. Examples of
the reactions occurring in the anaerobic and aerobic
steps are illustrated in Fig. 6. The examples include
pollutants which possess highly electron withdrawing
chloro, nitro and azo groups and which were shown
to be either recalcitrant or troublesome in aerobic
biotreatment systems but readily reduced by anaerobic
microorganisms. The aromatic rings of the reduced
products are too nucleophilic for further reduction by
anaerobes. The products are either troublesome or
completely recalcitrant to mineralization in anaerobic
environments, particularly methanogenic consortia.
However, they are highly suited for the electrophilic
attack by oxygenases of microorganisms in an aerobic
post treatment step.
Two studies report the sequenced treatment of
2,4,6-trichlorophenol. In anaerobic environments,
this compound seems to be preferentially reductively
dechlorinated in the ortho position, while 4-
chlorophenol is troublesome but not recalcitrant to
anaerobic biodegradation (Table 4). Thus in order to
ensure high removal efficiencies of all chloro groups, a
subsequent aerobic step is recommended. This principle
has also been applied to the removal of chlorophenol
mixtures in bleachery wastewaters (Table 4). Likewise
AOX removal from the anaerobic treatment of
chlorolignins in bleaching effluents is enhanced by 6
to 10% in subsequent aerobic post treatment (LaFond
& Ferguson 1991); and the AOX removal by aerobic
activated sludge is enhanced by 20% with prior anaerobic
pretreatment (Ferguson 1994).
The polychlorinated aromatic hydrocarbons represent
an important group of environmental pollutants
which are highly persistent in aerobic environments.
The lower chlorinated aromatic hydrocarbons
produced from their reductive dechlorination were
shown to be virtually recalcitrant to further biotransformations
in anaerobic environments. The obvious
solution of providing a sequenced treatment system
61
has been studied with hexachlorobenzene, polychlorihated
biphenyls, DDT and methoxychlor (Table 4).
The importance of the anaerobic pretreatment step
in enabling the subsequent aerobic mineralization of
these recalcitrant pollutants was best illustrated in one
study with methoxychlor (Fogel et al. 1982). When
incubated only in either aerobic or anaerobic soils,
no mineralization was found. Mineralization was only
observed under aerobic conditions which succeeded an
anaerobic pretreatment step.
Aromatic amines that are produced by the facile
anaerobic reduction of aerobically persistent nitroaromatics
or aerobically recalcitrant azo bonds are seldom
subject to further degradation under anaerobic conditions.
Aniline, the simplest aromatic amine, can be
regarded as being totally recalcitrant in methanogenic
consortia; however, this compound is readily degraded
in aerobic environments. Several investigators have
demonstrated the complete mineralization or elimination
of nitroaromatics and azo dyes in sequenced
anaerobic and aerobic steps (Table 4). During the continuous
treatment of wastewaters containing azo-dyes,
the anaerobic step provided nearly complete decolorization
of the dye components (97%) and about 60%
elimination of the COD. Afterwards, the aerobic post
treatment allowed an additional COD elimination of
30% (Jianrong et al. 1994). The extra COD removal
was most likely attributable to the poorly anaerobically
degradable aromatic amines derived from dye reduction.
If the dye wastewater was treated directly by
the aerobic step, incomplete decolorization occurred
(Zaoyan et al. 1992).
Sequenced polymerization
The high tendency of certain compounds to undergo
oxidative coupling in aerobic environments can be
regarded as undesirable if the goal of the biotreatment
system is to mineralize the pollutants. The humic-like
polymers formed from polyhydroxylated phenols and
chlorophenols as well as nitroaromatics and aromatic
amines, are highly recalcitrant to further biodegradation.
The initial oligomeric intermediates of these
coupling reactions are often unwanted mutagenic and
carcinogenic compounds such as dioxins and nitroazoxy-aromatics
from chlorophenols and nitroaromatics,
respectively. However, humic products of extensive
polymerization were shown to be non-toxic. Polymerization
of aromatic compounds into humus can
even be considered as a means of detoxifying pollution
(Bollag et al. 1988; Field & Lettinga 1991; Klibanov 
62
Table 3. Accumulating intermediates identified from the reductive cleavage of azo dyes by
anaerobic bacteria
Azo dye Product(s) Reference
Azobenzene aniline (Weber & Wolfe 1987)
Mordant-Yellow-3 6-aminonaphthalene-2-sulfonate and
Orange-I
Orange-II
Acid-Orange-7
Acid-Yellow-36
Acid-Dye
Acid-Yellow- 151
Acid-Black-24
Direct-Red-7
Direct-Yellow- 12
Direct-Yellow-50
Mordant-Black-9
Disperse-Red-5
Disperse-Red- 1
Direct-Red-28
5-amino-salicylate
1-amino-4-naphthol and
aniline-4-sulfonate
1-amino-2-naphthol and
aniline-4-sulfonate
4-aminobenzenesulfonate
3 -aminobenzenesulfonate and
n-phenyl- 1,4-diaminobenzene
2,5-dichloroaniline
3 -amino-4-hydroxy-benzenesulfamide
1 -aminonaphthalene-5-sul fonate
4,4'-diamino-3,3'-dimethoxybiphenyl
1 -amino-4-ethoxybenzene and
4-amino-2-sulfobenzaldehyde
2-aminonaphthalene-4,8-disulfonate
3-amino-4-hydroxybenzenesulfonate
2-chloro-4-nitro-aniline
4-nitroaniline
4,4'-diaminobiphenyl and
3,4-diaminonaphthalene- 1-sulfonate
(Haug et al. 1991)
(Meyer 1981)
(Meyer 1981)
(Brown & Hamburger 1987)
(Brown & Hamburger 1987)
(Brown & Hamburger 1987)
(Brown & Hamburger 1987)
Brown & Hamburger 1987)
(Brown & Hamburger 1987)
(Brown & Hamburger 1987)
Brown & Hamburger 1987)
Brown & Hamburger 1987)
(Yen et al. 1991)
(Yen et al. 1991)
(Weber 1991)
& Morris 1981; Lyr 1963). Humus may very well represent
safe end products of natural aromatic pollution
in the ecology. Naturally produced chloroaromatics are
hypothesized to be incorporated into humus (De Jong
et al. 1994), accounting for the high background levels
of AOX in soil organic matter (Asplund & Grimvall
1991). Humus collected from pristine environments
was shown to contain chloroaromatic units (Dahlman
et al. 1993).
The formation of toxic intermediates and recalcitrant
humus polymers can often be avoided by choosing
anaerobic conditions for biological treatment. This
approach is valid as long as the pollutants are sufficiently
degraded under anaerobic conditions to non-reactive
intermediates or mineralized end products. However at
the other extreme, partial biotransformations occurring
during anaerobic pretreatment can sometimes prepare
aromatic compounds for enhanced polymerization in
subsequent aerobic exposure. The demethylation of
chloroanisoles and chloroveratroles under anaerobic
conditions produces chlorophenols (Haggblom et al~
1993; Neilson et al. 1987). The chlorophenols would
then be susceptible to polymerization reactions in soils
containing plant and fungal phenol oxidizing enzymes.
Likewise, anaerobic metabolism of nitroaromatics to
reduced intermediates would be expected to enhance
the polymerization of these compounds in soil.
Anaerobic-aerobic cocultures
The sequenced biological treatment of chloroaromatics,
nitroaromatics and azo dyes in separated anaerobic
and aerobic phases clearly indicates that the biodegradation
of these persistent pollutants can be enhanced by
the combined activities of distinct microbial consortia.
The consortia do not necessarily have to be separated
in different reactors or distinct periods of operation.
Evidence in the literature indicates that anaerobic and
aerobic consortia can occur side by side. Strict anaerobes
can occur in anaerobic microniches located inside
biofilms and aggregates. Many anaerobes also have the
ability to survive periodic exposure to oxygen. Even
cells of aerobically grown bacteria may be able to carry 
63
Table 4. Examples indicating the enhanced biodegradation of aromatic pollutants in anaerobic-aerobic
sequences
Pollutant Anaerobic system Product Aerobic system Product Reference*
246TCP ANS 4CP ABI MIN I
246TCP ANFB 4CP AFB ELIM 2
Bleaeh-CP ANFB DeCL-CP ATF ELIM 3
Bleach-AOX ANFB DeCL-AOX ATF > DeCL-AOX 4
Bleach-AOX UASB DeCL-AOX AS > DeCL-AOX 5
Bleach-AOX UASB DeCL-AOX AS > DeCL-AOX 6
HCBz ANFB 123TCBz AFB MIN 7
12DCBz
PCB AN-SED CBs DCBs A-SED ELIM 8
PCB AN-SED CBs DCBs TCBs ABI ELIM 9
DDT/DDM ANS DDD DDM ABI MIN l0
DDT ANBI DDD DDMS DBP ABI 4CPAc I 1
Methoxychlor AN-SOIL unidentified A-SOIL MIN 12
NB ANF aniline AS MIN 13
4C2NP ANBI 4C2AP ABI MIN 14
Azo-dye MY3 ANFB 6A2NS 5AS ALR ELIM 15
Azo-dye MY3 AN-ABI 6A2NS 5AS ABI MIN 16
Azo-dye AY36 ANS 3ABS AS ELIM-DOC 17
Azo-dyeAY25 ANS 3A6MB-N-PSA AS ELIM-DOC 17
Azo-dye DR7 ANS 44DA33DMBP AS ELIM-DOC 17
Azo-dye DBI5 ANS 44DA33DMBP AS ELIM-DOC 17
Azo-dye DYI2 ANS 1A4EB AS ELIM-DOC 17
Textile-WW AN-RBC decolourized products A-RBC ELIM-COD 18
Textile-WW UASB decolourizedproducts AS ELIM-COD 19
Compounds: 246TCE 2,4,6-trichlorophenol; Bleach-CR chlorophenols in bleachery effluent;
Bleach-AOX, bleachery effluent AOX; HCBz, hexachlorobenzene; PCB, polychlorinated biphenyls;
DDT, 1,1,1-trichloro-2,2-bis(4-chlorophenyl)ethane; DDM, 4,4'-dichlorophenylmethane; Methoxychlor;
1,1,1-trichloro-2,2-bis(4-methoxyphenyl)ethane; NB, nitrobenzene; 4C2NP, 4-chloro-2-
nitrophenol; MY3, mordant-yellow-3; AY23, acid-yellow-36; AY25, acid-yellow-25; DR7, directred-7;
DB 15, direct-blue- 15; DY 12, direct-yellow- 12; Textile-WW, textile industry wastewater.
Products: 4CE 4-chlorophenol; DeCI-CR dechlorinated chlorophenols; DeCI-AOX, dechlorinated
AOX; 123TCBz, 1,2,3-trichlorobenzene; 12DCBz 1,2-dichlorobenzene; CBs, monochlorobiphenyls;
DCBs, dichlorobiphenyls; TCBs, trichlorobiphenyls; DDD, 1,1-diehloro-
2,2-bis(4-chlorophenyl)ethane; DDM, 4,4'-dichlorophenylmethane; DDMS, 1-chloro-2,2-bis(4-
chlorophenyl)ethane; DBR 4,4'-dichlorobenzophenone; 4C2AR 4-chloro-2-aminophenol; 6A2NS,
6-amino-2-naphthylsulfonate; 5AS, 5-aminosalicylate; 3ABS, 3-aminobenzenesulfonate; 3A6MBN-PSA,
3-amino-6-methylbenzene-N-phenylsulfonamide; 44DA33DMBE 4,4'-diamino-3,3'-
dimethoxybiphenyl; IA4EB, l-amino-4-ethoxybenzene; MIN, mineralized products; ELIM, elimination
pollutant(s); DeCI-AOX, dechlorination AOX; > DeCI-AOX, increased dechlorination of
AOX; 4CPAc, 4-chlorophenylacetic acid; ELIM-DOC, elimination of dissolved organic carbon;
ELIM-COD, elimination chemical oxygen demand.
System: ANBI, anaerobic bacterial isolate; AN-AB L anaerobically incubated resting cells of aerobic
bacterial isolates; ANS, anaerobic sludge; AN-SED, anaerobically incubated sediments; AN-SOIL,
anaerobically incubated soil; ANFB, anaerobic flu idized/expanded bed; UASB, upward-flow anaerobic
sludge blanket; ANE anaerobic fixed bed/filter; A N-R BC, anaerobic rotating biological contacter;
ABI, aerobic bacterial isolate; AS activated sludge; A-SED, aerobically incubated sediments; ASOIL,
aerobically incubated soil; AFB, aerobic fluidized bed; ATE aerobic trickling filter; ALR,
airlift loop reactor; A-RBC, aerobic rotating biological contacter.
* References: 1 = (Kafkewitz et al. 1992); 2 = (Fahmy 1992); 3 = (Hakulinen & Salkinoja-Salouen
1982); 4 = (Haggblom & Salkinoia-Salonen 1991 ); 5 = (LaFond & Ferguson 1991); 6 = (Ferguson
1994); 7 = (Fatbepure & Vogel 1991 ); 8 = (Anid et al. 1991 ); 9 = (Bedard et al. [ 987); l 0 = (Beunick
& Rehm 1988); 11 = (Pfaender & Alexander 1972); 12 = (Fogel et a[. 1982); 13 = (Dickel et al.
1993); 14 = (Beunink & Rehm 1990); 15 = Glacsscr el al. 1992); 16 = (Haug et aI. 1991); 17 =
(Brown & Hamburger 1987); 18 = (Zaoyan el a[. 1992); 19 = (Jianrong et al. 1994). 
64
out typical anaerobic bioconversions under conditions
of oxygen limitation. Therefore, anaerobic and aerobic
biodegradative capacities can be utilized synchronously
in one bioreactor.
Anaerobic microniches in aerobic environments
Paradoxically, aerobic bacteria create anaerobic environments
by the consumption of oxygen. Oxygen has a
low solubility and a slow diffusibility in water (Cussler
1992; Geankoplis 1983). Consequently when there is
an excess of readily metabolizable substrate compared
to the oxygen supply, anaerobic environments are created.
Aerobic wastewater treatment is only made possible
by forced convective transport of oxygen achieved
by vigorous mixing. Even in well aerated systems as
soon as there is a barrier to mixing, the 02 supply will
become rate limiting. In wastewater treatment systems
or during bioremediation of soils and sediments, such
barriers are known to be caused by biofilms, settled
layers of particles or soil aggregates, which provide
resistance to convective mass transport (Cussler 1992;
Geankoplis 1983). Thus, oxygen supply to deep positions
is almost exclusively limited to the slow process
of diffusion (De Beer 1990; Hooijmans 1990). Based
on these observations, anaerobic microniches can be
expected to occur inside particulate matrices which are
located in aerobic macroenvironments.
In aerobic bioreactors with immobilized biomass,
oxygen limitation is due to the biofilm itself. Under
steady state conditions, zones of decreasing oxygen
concentration will be formed towards the centre of
the biofilm. The depth of penetration will depend on
the diffusion and consumption of oxygen. The diffusion
will be most influenced by the oxygen concentration
in the bulk liquid phase and the thickness of
the biofilm; while oxygen consumption is influenced
by the presence of readily metabolizable substrates.
Several investigators have used microsensors to determine
the oxygen profiles within aerobic biofilms or
within gel beads containing microorganisms actively
respiring substrates, usually resulting in gradients
from the oxic outer layers to the anoxic layers in the
centre (De Beer 1990; Hooijmans 1990; Peters et al.
1987; Revsbech et al. 1989; Wijffels et al. 1991).
Model systems with the 02 consuming enzyme, Llactate-oxygen-2-oxidoreductase,
immobilized in gel
beads, clearly indicated the role of increasing oxygen
uptake rate (established by varying the enzyme concentration)
on the decreasing depth of oxygen penetration
(Hooijmans 1990). Similar results were also obtained
by varying the O2-uptake rate with different concentrations
of Escherichia coli immobilized in gel beads
supplied with glucose as substrate (Hooijmans 1990) as
illustrated in Fig. 7. When the concentration of active
aerobic bacteria exceeds 1 g biomass L-1 of immobilized
phase, a general finding is that oxygen rarely
penetrates more than a few hundred #m due to the relatively
rapid uptake of oxygen compared to the slow
diffusion. In subtrate limited systems such as soils, the
02 uptake rate is slower and consequently deeper 02
penetration would be expected. Oxygen microprofiles
of typical silt loam soil aggregates indicate a penetration
of 3 mm (Tiedje et al. 1984). Consequently, anaerobic
microorganisms located inside reactor biofilms or
soil aggregates would be adequately protected against
contact with oxygen, allowing the occurrence of denitrification,
sulphate reduction or methanogenesis.
The occurrence of these anaerobic microniches in
environments with a well aerated bulk phase is best
illustrated by the isolation of strict anaerobes from
aerobic activated sludge. The fact that methanogens
are present in aerobic sludge was demonstrated when
Methanothrix soehngenii could be enriched from such
samples (Huser et al. 1982). Activated sludge is often
used successfully as seed for the start-up of anaerobic
wastewater treatment reactors (Noyola & Moreno
1994; Wu et al. 1987). The success can be attributed
to the presence of methanogenic bacteria in the aerobic
sludge. Methanobacterium, Methanococcus and
Methanosarcina were observed in both the original aerobic
activated sludge flocs and the anaerobic granular
sludge formed. According to fluorescent microscopic
examination, several anaerobic nuclei were identified
deep inside flocs of the original aerobic sludge (Wu et
al. 1987). A strictly anaerobic tetrachloroethene reducing
bacterium was also isolated from aerobic activated
sludge (Neumann et al. 1994).
Additionally, oxic marine sediments are considered
to be reducing environments covered only by a thin
highly oxidized surface layer (Battersby et al. 1985;
Jurgensen 1977). The obligate anaerobe Desulfovibrio
sp. was isolated from within sediment aggregates,
while the sulphide oxidizing bacterium Beggiatoa sp.
was found in the surface layer. The occurrence of pyrite
in the oxidized layer can only be explained by the rapid
oxidation of Fe 2+ to Fe 3+ on the one hand, and the
formation of H2S from sulfate reduction on the other
(Jurgensen 1977). The occurrence of denitrification in
soil while oxygen is present in the macroporosity was
shown to be related to anaerobic zones formed within
the soil aggregates (Tiedje et al. 1984). The rate 
of denitrification was shown to be highly correlated
to the anaerobic volume fraction of the soil aggregate
as calculated on the basis of oxygen diffusion- and
consumption-rates.
Tolerance of strict anaerobes to oxygen
Many anaerobes have the ability to survive periodic
exposure to oxygen which might be encountered in
fluctuating conditions of oxygen supply. Oxygen is
considered as a suspect toxic compound since severaI
investigations reported a detrimental effect, especially
for several metbanogens which are usually regarded as
strict anaerobes (Hungate 1969; Whitman et al. 1992).
Oxygen is a powerful reactant because reduced species
such as superoxide and eventually hydrogen peroxide
are spontaneously generated which are potentially toxic
radicals to all living cells (Gottschalk & Peinemann
1992; Morris 1979). The toxic effect can damage the
chromosomal DNA, as was suggested for Roseburia
cecicola which is a strict anaerobe considered intolerant
to oxygen (Martin & Savage 1988). Obligate
anaerobic bacteria, contrary to the aerobic and facultative
bacteria, can be defined as those microorganisms
unable to synthesize a respiratory chain with oxygen
as terminal electron acceptor and oxidize organic substrates
to carbon dioxide and water. They are considered
to live strictly without oxygen (Gottschalk &
Peinemann 1992). The ability of strict anaerobes to
survive and coexist in aerobic environments can be
attributed to a limited tolerance of some anaerobes for
direct contact with oxygen, such as would be the case
if they were exposed to oxygen in pure culture. On
the other hand, all strict anaerobes may be expected to
tolerate oxygen to a certain extent if they are present
in mixed culture together with facultative bacteria that
consume the oxygen, forming protected microniches.

Tolerance to oxygen in pure culture
Aerobic and facultative bacteria are regarded as possessing
appropriate protective mechanisms against the
oxygen radicals. The main hypotheses for the protective
mechanisms is the ability to produce two enzymes,
superoxide dismutase (SOD) and catalase. SOD seems
to be indispensable to all the aerobes (Gottschalk &
Peinemann 1992; Morris 1979), despite the claim that
a few aerobes lack it (Fee 1982). The total lack of SOD
has also been suggested as the reason for oxygen intolerance
among strict obligate anaerobes (Morris 1979).
3.5
65
3.0
= 2.5
2,0
"~ 1.5
==
~. 1.o
o 0.5
0.0
0
Concentration Biornass in Gel Slab (g/l)
30
Fig. 7. Depth of 02 penetration measured by a microsensor in
calcium-alginate slabs, immobilized with Escherichia coli actively
respiring glucose, as a function of the biomass concentration (Hooijmans
1990).
o
O I.O
5O
e-,
ta0
"~ = 40
¢, et-.cr
'- ~ et//./~
3o
:~ 20 ,c .= ~ ,c
= 10 A,t ¢,o eet al ~ r=. 0.661
Nedal¢o only r=- O. 998
°~ 0 ...........
0 2 4 6 8 10 12
maximum aerobic activity
(g 0 2/g VSS. d)
Fig. 8. The 50% inhibitory concentration (50% IC) of oxygen
to acetoclastic methanogenic activity as a function of the rate of
02 uptake by facultative anaerobes in different samples of granular
sludge obtained from upward-flow anaerobic sludge blanket (UASB)
reactors (Kato et al. 1993b). The sludges were exposed to 02 during
three days and the methanogenic activity was monitored with acetate
directly after the exposure. The granular sludges had mean aggregate
diameters of 1.3 to 2.8 ram) and were obtained from UASB treating
domestic sewage (A); 'Nedalco' alcohol distillery (m); wheat
starch processing (e); paper manufacturing (O); and recycle paper
manufacturing ([3) wastewaters. Substrate during oxygen exposure;
et, ethanol; ac, acetate; ns, no substrate supplied; cr, granular sludge
was crushed.
Curiously enough, many obligate anaerobes do contain
SOD and they can tolerate to some extent low levels
of direct contact with oxygen (Morris 1979; Rolfe et
al. 1978). These findings reveal that the obligate anaerobes
differ in their sensitivity to oxygen, varying from
those with strict intolerance to others possessing some
intrinsic tolerance.
Both the oxygen tension and the redox potential are
claimed to be the factor responsible for the sensitivity. 
66
1.°. I ~F 2F ~F ,F -r~F ~ ~1
I o" 0.6 -7!-- --
0 0.4
0.2
~" O0 ,
®l
0 '-- "0
0 ~ 4~
o ~ ~ 9 ~2 ~s ;s 21
"lime (days)
Fig. 9. Coexistence of methanogenic, facultative heterotrophic
and methanotrophic bacteria in granular sludge during 6 repeated
batch feedings (IF to 6F) supplied with 2 g COD/L ethanol and
18% 02 (Kato et al. 1993a). A. Parallel production of methane
with O2 uptake and methane consumption (4F to 6F). II, methane
production (g COD/L of liqtiid); O, oxygen uptake (g O2/L of
liquid). B. Dissolved oxygen present in the bulk liquid medium. *,
calculated from oxygen measurement in the head space and Henry's
law; A, directly measured.
Substrate
BLLK LIQUID PHASE
O~
~ana
Fig. lO. Conceptual model detailing the coexistence of aerobic and
anaerobic microniches in granular sludge exposed to oxygen and
substrate.
The effect of oxygen on 8 different species of anaerobic
bacteria was shown to be related to the oxygen tension
(0.2 to 3 atm); although each species had a different
sensitivity to oxygen (Fredete et al. 1967). Low medium
redox potential did not enable those microorganisms
classified as intolerant anaerobes, e.g. Clostridium
haemolycum, to grow at 02 tensions of 0.5%.
However, moderate anaerobes, e.g. Bacteroides fragilis;
could grow between 0.5% and as high as 2 to 8%
02. Microaerophiles, e.g. Vibrio sputorum and V.fetus,
grew poorly in the absence of oxygen but maximally
at intermediate 02 levels of 5 to 10% (Loesche 1969).
The exclusion of molecular oxygen together with an
environment of very low redox potential was postulated
as being essential for the anaerobic microorganisms,
especially the methanogens (Gottschalk & Peinemann
1992; Hungate 1969). However, some experiments
showed the separate effects of oxygen and redox potential
on anaerobic cultures, and oxygen concentration
was by far the most important factor contributing to
the toxicity (O'Brien & Morris 1971; Walden & Hentges
1975).
The continuous anaerobic culture ofB. fragilis submitted
to different conditions of redox alone revealed
that there was no detectable change in the viable cell
density. However, the introduction of oxygen to 10-
100% of atmospheric saturation during 6 h resulted in
a steady decline in the viable cell density. The mechanism
of oxygen-mediated inhibition was assumed to
be due to the formation of superoxide radicals. However,
the effect was bacteriostatic rather than bactericidal.
The explanation for the bacteriostatic effect
was that cells of B. fragilis contained SOD, which was
demonstrated in parallel investigations (Onderdonk et
al. 1976).
The most noteworthy group of strict anaerobic bacteria
involved in wastewater treatment processes are
the methanogens. Since the early works on the isolation
of pure cultures of Methanosarcina barkeri and
Methanobacteriumformicicum, the widespread view
is that the methanogens are fastidious microorganisms
requiring strict anaerobic conditions for growth and
methane production. Anaerobic conditions for working
with methanogenic bacterial cultures are ensured
by the Hungate-technique which is still employed
today with some modifications (Hungate 1969). Possible
traces of oxygen are eliminated by the addition
of reducing agents such as cysteine or sulphide, to
poise the redox potential within the low range. Indeed
many methanogens are acutely sensitive to oxygen.
Methanococcus voltae and Methanococcus vannielii
were shown to be highly intolerant to oxygen which
corresponded to their lack of SOD (Kiener & Leisinger
1983). Also, two thermophilic methanogens isolated
from a 55°C anaerobic kelp digester were shown
to cease immediately both growth and methane production,
after being exposed to only 0.1% oxygen in
the head space (Ferguson & Mah 1983). Methanobac- 
terium ruminantium, Methanobacterium mobile and
Methanobacterium sp. strain AZ were also found
to be highly sensitive to oxygen since their growth
and methane production were completely prevented at
0.01 ppm dissolved oxygen (Zehnder & Wuhrmann
1977).
However, other investigations indicate that at least
some methanogens do have intrinsic tolerance to oxygen.
Only a slow decline was observed in the methane
production of Methanobacterium sp. strain M.o.H.
actively metabolizing H2 when it was exposed to
oxygen (Roberton & Wolfe 1970). Oxygen tolerance
was also observed among several species of bacteria
in the order Methanomicrobiales and Methanobacterium
bryantii, and was attributed to SOD, which
was detected and correlated to the defense against
oxygen toxicity (Kiener & Leisinger 1983; Kirby et
al. 1981). Methanobacterium thermoautotrophicum,
Methanobrevibacter arboriphilus and Methanosarcina
barkeri strains, which were originally isolated from
sludge digesters, survived for hours in the presence of
air without decrease in the number of colony forming
units (Kiener & Leisinger 1983; Kirby et al.
1981). Enrichment cultures of Methanothrix soehngenii
derived from anaerobic sludge digesters were
exposed to pure oxygen for 48 hours. The exposure
did not cause cell lysis nor loss in methane producing
activity compared to controls (Huser et al. 1982).
Methanobacterium and Methanosarcina strains are
also commonly isolated from dry and oxic paddy soil,
demonstrating that they can survive under aerobic conditions
between the flooding periods. That methanogenesis
starts within a few days after flooding was
confirmed in research with the isolated pure cultures of
Methanosarcina barkeri strain Fusaro, Methanosarcina
sp. strain MVF4 and Methanobacterium sp. strain
HVF5 (Fetzer et al. 1993).
Aside from the intrinsic tolerance due to the SOD
that some methanogenic species possess, other factors
have been postulated to be involved in protection
against oxygen. Methanosarcina barkeri strain Fusaro
was shown to have a number of redox carriers decreasing
the redox potential when chemical oxidant agents
were used. However, this reducing capacity was not
enough to avoid the inhibition by oxygen at concentrations
higher than 0.5% in the gas phase. Nonetheless,
the capacity to adjust the redox potential in its
own redox environment may partly explain good survival
in dry and oxic soil (Fetzer & Conrad 1993).
The existence of cells in aggregates can also affect
the oxygen tolerance. This seemed to be the case for
67
a Methanosarcina strain that showed higher oxygen
tolerance in cell aggregates compared with dispersed
cells (Kiener & Leisinger 1983).
Tolerance to oxygen in mixed culture
Natural mixed cultures represent complex consortia
of microorganisms, where the consumption of oxygen
in an anaerobic reactor can very likely occur
due to the presence of facultative bacteria in the
anaerobic sludges. When oxygen was placed in the
headspace of serum bottles or chemostats containing
natural methanogenic consortia, 02 consumption started
directly (Gerritse et al. 1990; Kato et al. 1993a;
Shelton & Tiedje 1984). The initial specific 02 consuming
activity of granular anaerobic sludge recovered
from various UASB reactors and fed with ethanol
ranged from 1 to 11 g 02 g-1 VSS d -1 (Kato et
al. 1993b), indicating ample activity of facultative
bacteria in natural mixed cultures of anaerobic bacteria.
Thus regardless of the intrinsic tolerance that
has been reported for some strict anaerobes such as
methanogens, the creation of anaerobic environments
by facultative bacteria is probably the most important
factor for the protection of methanogens in anaerobic
sludges against 02 exposure. The 50% inhibiting
concentration (50% IC) of various samples of anaerobic
granular sludge exposed to oxygen for three days
ranged from 7 to 41% 02 in the head space at the start
of the exposure period. These values corresponded to
dissolved oxygen concentrations ranging from 0.05 to
6.1 mg L -1 in the bulk liquid phase at the end of the
exposure period (Kato et al. 1993b). The 50% IC values
were found to be highly correlated to specific 02 uptake
rates of the sludges tested which clearly indicates that
the consumption of oxygen was a major factor in the
remarkably high tolerance to oxygen (Fig. 8). Considering
that the penetration of oxygen in active biofilms
would only be a few hundred micrometers and that the
granules had diameters ranging from 1.3 to 2.8 mm,
voluminous anaerobic zones were most likely present
inside the granules where the methanogenic bacteria
were protected from contact with 02.
Anaerobic activity of aerobic bacteria
Anaerobic activity is not restricted to strict anaerobic
bacteria. The cells of aerobically grown bacteria
may be able to carry out typical anaerobic reactions in
reducing environments. Since aerobes can grow faster
than anaerobes, utilizing cells of aerobic bacteria can 
68
facilitate the implantation of a mixed anaerobic-aerobic
process. Many aerobic bacteria are able to reduce aromatic
electron-withdrawing substituents when incubated
anaerobically just as anaerobes can. Moreover, some
strains of aerobic bacteria can carry out unique reactions
under anaerobic conditions.
Aerobic activated sludge was used in anaerobic
incubations to reductively dechlorinate 4,4'-
dichlorobiphenyl to 4-chlorobiphenyl (Mavoungou
et al. 1991). Anaerobically incubated activated
sludge also caused the reduction of 2,4-dinitrotoluene
to 2-nitroso-4-nitrotoluene, 4-nitroso-2-nitrotoluene,
2-amino-4-nitrotoluene and 4-amino-2-nitrotoluene
when a suitable electron donor was provided (Liu
et al. 1984). Likewise, cells from activated sludge
could decolourize several azo dyes under anaerobic
conditions (Wuhrmann et al. 1980). In a sequenced
anaerobic-aerobic reactor system for the biodegradation
of the azo dye, Mordant-Yellow-3, biomass recovered
from the aerobic post treatment step was recycled
to the anaerobic stage where the azo bond was reductively
cleaved (Glaesser et al. 1992). Although it is not
clear whether strict anaerobes or aerobes in the aerobic
activated sludge were responsible for these reductions,
the studies do clearly demonstrate that reduction
of 'xenobiotic' electron withdrawing substituents is
not necessarily restricted to mature anaerobic consortia.

The ability of aerobic bacteria to cause anaerobic
biotransformations is best illustrated in studies with
isolated pure cultures. Anaerobically incubated cell
free extracts ofHydrogenomonas sp. grown aerobically
on diphenylmethane were able to reduce the polychlorinated
aromatic hydrocarbon, DDT, to dechlorinated
intermediates (Pfaender & Alexander 1972). Four
studies indicated the ability of aerobically grown pure
cultures of bacteria to reductively cleave a variety of
azo dyes during anaerobic incubations of the harvested
cells (Haug et al. 1991; Mechsner & Wuhrmann 1982;
Ryan et al. 1968; Wuhrmann et al. 1980).
Anaerobically incubated resting cells or cell free
extracts of aerobes have been shown to hydroxylate
chloro- and nitroaromatics. Aerobically grown cells
of Acinetobacter sp. strain 4CB 1 and those of another
bacterial isolate, strain NTB-1, could convert 4-
chlorobenzoate to 4-hydroxybenzoate in the absence of
elemental oxygen (Adriaens et al. 1989; Groenewegen
et al. 1992). Strain NTB- 1 required nitrate for this reaction
and a Coenzyme-A-thioester of 4-chlorobenzoate
was shown to be involved in the reaction mechanism
(Groenewegen et al. 1992). Acinetobacter sp. strain
4CB 1 could also convert 3,4-dichlorobenzoic acid to 4-
carboxy- 1,2-benzoquinone in the absence of 02 (Adriaens
et al. 1989). Washed cells and cell free extract
of the aerobically cultivated Comamonas acidovorans
sp. strain NBA-10, converted 4-nitrobenzoate to 3,4-
dihydroxybenzoate under anaerobic conditions (Groenewegen
& de Bont 1992). 4-Nitrobenzoate was first
reduced to 4-hydroxylaminobenzoate, and this intermediate
was converted to 3,4-dihydroxybenzoate by a
novel enzyme.
Anaerobic-aerobic cocultures
Coexistence of anaerobes and aerobes
The coexistence of anaerobes and aerobes in coculture
does not only require that the anaerobes are protected
from O2-toxicity. The anaerobes must also be able to
compete for substrate in order to survive for extended
periods. Aerobic facultative heterotrophs which can
utilize oxygen for respiration, can obtain higher levels
of energy from the substrate and consequently are
expected to grow faster than anaerobic bacteria competing
for the same substrate. Thus in cultures where
the aerobes are present in suspension, each unit of 02
added to the coculture would be reflected by a unit of
BOD stolen from the anaerobes (Gerritse et al. 1990;
Kato et al. 1993a; Shelton & Tiedje 1984). Thus anaerobic
microorganisms can only be maintained in such
cocultures if the supply of substrate in terms of BOD
is greater than the transfer of 02 into the liquid phase.
Since the aerobic or facultative bacteria adequately
consume the limited O2 supplied, the resulting dissolved
oxygen concentration in the bulk liquid phase
will be very low (Gerritse & Gottschal 1993; Gerritse
et al. 1990).
Studies with anaerobic-aerobic cocultures reveal
that methanogens can be maintained in aerated conditions
if the 02 supply is not excessive (Gerritse &
Gottschal 1993; Gerritse et al. 1990; Scott et al. 1983).
In one study, three defined cocultures of anaerobic
and aerobic bacteria were established in 02 limited
chemostats: 1) Methanobacteriumformicicum together
with the aerobic heterotroph Comamonas testosteroni;
2) M. formicicum together with the aerobic
methanotroph Methyloeystis sp.; and 3) Methanosarcina
barkeri together with C. testosteroni (Gerritse &
Gottschal 1993). Growth of the methanogenic and aerobic
bacteria occurred over extended periods of time
(200 h). Cocultures with C. testosteroni were found
to be more stable than those with the methanotroph. 
The former bacteria had a higher affinity for 0 2 resulting
in lower levels of dissolved oxygen which protected
the methanogens better against 02 poisoning. The
methanotroph, however, was able to consume methane
produced by M. formicicum. The dissolved oxygen in
the chemostats was lower than the detection limit of
0.0064 mg L -1. However, based on growth kinetics,
it was calculated that the dissolved oxygen concentration
ranged from 0.0002 to 0.0013 mg L -1. The
growth rate of M. formicicum was reduced by 50%
at dissolved oxygen concentrations of approximately
0.00064 mg L-1 while such reductions in the growth
rate were not observed for M. barkeri at concentrations
up to 0.0013 mg L -1. Similar experiments were also
conducted in chemostats with an undefined mixed culture
enriched under anaerobic conditions with formate,
peptone and yeast extract as substrate, resulting in a
formate degrading methanogenic consortia (Gerritse et
al. 1990). A gradual increase in the 02 supply initially
enhanced the rate of methane production by 20%.
This phenomenon has also been observed by others
and is attributed to the production of unknown 'growth
factors' by the facultative bacteria (Pirt & Lee 1983;
Scott et al. 1983). As the 02 input was increased further,
methanogens could be maintained in the chemostat
until all volatile organic acid fermentation products
(derived from the fermentation of peptone and
yeast extract) were fully consumed by the facultative
bacteria. Afterwards, further increments of 02 supply
resulted in the wash-out of methanogens and accumulation
of formate since the fermentation products were
needed to consume incoming 02.
The coexistence of anaerobes and aerobes in one
environment has also been studied with other obligate
anaerobic bacteria. Sulfate reduction has repeatedly
been observed under aerated conditions if facultative or
aerobic bacteria simultaneously consume 02 (Battersby
et al. 1985; Cypionka et al. 1985; Jurgensen 1977;
Marschall et al. 1993). The obligate anaerobic fermentative
bacterium, Veillonella alcalescens, was maintained
in a chemostat coculture with the obligate aerobe,
Pseudomonas testosteroni when both were supplied
with the common substrate lactic acid (Gerritse
et al. 1990). Another anaerobic fermentative bacterium,
Zymomonas mobil&, was able to convert glucose
to ethanol in an aerated coculture with the fungus,
Aspergillus awamori (Tanaka et al. 1986).
In complex biofilms, anaerobic-aerobic cocultures
can be maintained in 02 unlimited environments. Oxygen
tolerant granular anaerobic sludge was able to convert
from 3 to 25% of the ethanol substrate to methane
69
in 3 days while at least 23 to 2 mg L-1 of dissolved
oxygen prevailed in the medium (Kato et al. 1993a).
Methane was produced in conditions where the 02
supply exceeded the substrate BOD supply by a factor
of 11. This finding can only be explained by the
occurrence of microaerophilic or anaerobic microniches
deep inside the biofilm where the 02 content is so
low that the aerobic respiration rate is limited due to
the low oxygen flux. Ethanol and volatile fatty acids
have higher aqueous solubilities than 02 and as such
would consequently be expected to have higher diffusive
mass transport into the biofilms than oxygen.
Thus, these substrates could potentially penetrate the
biofilm more than oxygen and be present in the anaerobic
microniches at suitable concentrations. To test
the hypothesis that methanogens can compete for substrate
in 02 unlimited conditions for prolonged periods
of time, methanogenic granular sludge was incubated
in a repeated batch experiment with 18% 02 in the
head space (Kato et al. 1993a). For 18 days, uptake of
02 occurred simultaneously with methane production
while the dissolved oxygen concentration in the bulk
media fluctuated between 2 and 6 mg L- 1 (Fig. 9). By
the 10th day of this experiment, the methane produced
started to become consumed by aerobic methanotrophic
bacteria which had developed in the coculture. After
18 days of exposure to 02, healthy methanogenic activity
was still evident when 02 was excluded from the
head space. A conceptual model illustrating the aerobic
and anaerobic zones in a sludge granule and the
flow of substrates and products between these zones is
illustrated in Fig. 10.
Denitrification was also shown to occur in the
anaerobic zones of biofilms recovered from an aerobic
trickling filter treating municipal wastewater (Revsbech
et al. 1989). The bulk liquid phase contained
6.4 mg L-1 of dissolved oxygen. However at a depth
of several hundred #m, 02 was no longer detectable.
Micro-profiles of denitrification were generated by
detecting N20 in biofilms where the further reduction
of this denitrification intermediate was inhibited with
acetylene. The results obtained with this technique
illustrated that denitrification was located in the anaerobic
zone between a biofilm depth of 400 to 2000 #m.
Photosynthesis, promoted by exposing the biofilm to
light, inhibited denitrification due to the endogenous
dissolved oxygen formed deep in the biofilm. 
70
Biodegradation of pollutants in anaerobic-aerobic
cocultures
The occurrence of anaerobic zones in aerobic biofilms
was initially viewed as a disadvantageous rate limitation
in the overall kinetics of aerobic bioconversions.
However, this disadvantage can now be used to
promote the complete biodegradation of typical recalcitrant
xenobiotic aromatic compounds characterized
by electron-withdrawing substituents. The anaerobic
zones that develop in the biofilms can be used to house
microorganisms displaying anaerobic activity towards
the reduction of these xenobiotic substituents. Concomitantly,
microorganisms in the aerobic zones of the
biofilm can be used to mineralize the reduced products,
enabling the benefits of sequenced anaerobic-aerobic
treatment in one bioreactor. Three examples are reported
in the literature where the recalcitrant behaviour of
aromatic pollutants was overcome in cocultures constructed
from anaerobic and aerobic bacteria.
In the first study, an anaerobic-aerobic coculture
was applied to the degradation of a mixture of DDT
and 4,4'-dichlorodiphenylmethane (DDM) (Beunick
& Rehm 1988). A DDT dechlorinating bacterium,
Enterobacter cloacae, isolated from digested sewage
sludge was coimmobilized into calcium alginate beads
together withAlcaligenes sp. strain Iso DPM4, an obligate
aerobic bacterium that was able to cometabolize
DDM with diphenylmethane as a primary substrate.
The coculture placed into an aerated fermentor where
the bulk liquid phase dissolved oxygen concentration
ranged from 2.4 to 8 mg L -1, was able to simultaneously
dechlorinate DDT and mineralize DDM. That
dechlorination was possible under the aerobic conditions
prevailing, was attributed to anaerobic microniches
in the centre of the gel beads.
In the second study, a similar coculture was constructed
in calcium alginate beads for the biodegradation
of 4-chloro-2-nitrophenol (4C2NP) (Beunink &
Rehm 1990). E. cloacae was able to reduce 4C2NP
to 4-chloro-2-aminophenol (4C2AP) and 4-chloro-2-
acetaminophenol (4C2AAP) in anaerobic conditions.
The obligate aerobe, Alcaligenes sp. strain TK2, was
able to mineralize 4C2AP in aerobic conditions. While
E. cloacae was unable to metabolize 4C2AP in either
aerobic or anaerobic conditions and Alcaligenes sp.
strain TK2 was unable to metabolize 4C2NP, the coculture
immobilized in 3 mm diameter beads and placed
in a well aerated airlift reactor was able to mineralize
4C2NP completely to CO2, C1- and NH4 +. The distribution
of each microorganism in the gel indicated
that E. cloacae was present in the anaerobic core of
the beads, while Alcaligenes was located in the aerobic
outer periphery. Thus the complete mineralization
can be rationalized by the migration of 4C2NP into the
anaerobic zone and subsequent migration of 4C2AP
and 4C2AAP to the aerobic zone. The importance of
a thick bead diameter on the creation of anaerobic
zones was illustrated by the lack of 4C2NP reduction
in cocultures immobilized in small 1 mm diameter
beads.
In the third study, an anaerobic enrichment culture
derived from fresh water sediments, which was able to
dechlorinate 2,3,6-trichlorobenzoic acid (236TCBc) to
2,5-dichlorobenzoic acid (25DCBc), was immobilized
on a vermiculite support during continuous operation
(Gerritse & Gottschal 1992). A 25DCBc mineralizing
obligate aerobe, Pseudomonas aeruginosa was also
introduced into the reactor. While the anaerobic enrichment
culture alone was not able to further metabolize
25DCBc and while P. aeruginosa in pure culture was
not able to degrade 236TCBc, the aerated coculture
was able to completely mineralize 236TCBc, with 95%
recovery oforganochlorine as CI-. Reductive dechlorination
of 236TCBc to 25DCBc apparently occurred in
the immobilized biomass where anaerobic zones were
most likely established. The further mineralization of
25DCBc was most likely carried out by the free suspended
cells of P aeruginosa in the bulk liquid phase.
The dissolved oxygen concentration in the reactor bulk
liquid ranged from 0.013 to 0.03 mg L -I .
Conclusions
Anaerobic and aerobic metabolic activities are a prerequisite
for the complete biodegradation of recalcitrant
aromatic pollutants which contain electronwithdrawing
substituents. While aromatic pollutants
with chloro, nitro and azo substituents are often recalcitrant
or troublesome for oxygenolytic attack by aerobes,
these substituents are readily reduced by both
anaerobic microorganisms and by resting cells of aerobic
microorganisms incubated anaerobically. In turn,
the reduced products, such as lower chlorinated aromatics
or aromatic amines, are persistent to further
anaerobic degradation. However, they are readily mineralized
by bacteria under aerobic conditions. Environmental
biotechnology should therefore attempt to
provide both anaerobic and aerobic environments in
order to promote the mineralization of these xenobiotic
pollutants. The anaerobic and aerobic environments 
can be provided in sequenced reactors. However since
anaerobic microniches are easily established in aerated
biofilms, the best of both worlds can be obtained in
a single bioreactor. Therefore, the recalcitrant nature
of polychloro- and polynitro-aromatics as well as azo
dyes can be overcome by utilizing anaerobic-aerobic
cocultures.
Polymerization of polyhydroxylated and chlorinated
phenols as well as nitroaromatics and aromatic
amines in aerobic environments is a second factor related
to the aerobic recalcitrance of aromatic pollutants. If
these compounds can be mineralized by anaerobic consortia,
than anaerobic biotreatment is recommended in
order to ensure complete biodegradation and prevent
the formation of recalcitrant humic polymers. However,
if these compounds are only modified in anaerobic
environments by o-dealkylation and reduction of
the substituents, the resulting products may even be
more susceptible to polymerization in a subsequent
aerobic enviromnent. Since polymerization has been
shown to detoxify aromatic pollutants, the activation
of aromatic pollutants for polymerization can potentially
be encouraged by an anaerobic pretreatment step
prior to oxidation. On the other hand, mineralization of
polymerizable pollutants can possibly be achieved in
anaerobic-aerobic cocultures. Pollutants activated by
biotransformations in the anaerobic zone of the biofilm
would migrate to the aerobic bacteria where they could
be rapidly mineralized. In this manner, contact with
the more oxidized bulk liquid phase, where these compounds
would be susceptible to polymerization, could
be avoided. 
