60A
Microbial Degradation of Hydrocarbons in the Environment

The recent spill of more than 200,000 barrels of crude oil
from the oil tanker Exxon Valdez in Prince William Sound,
Alaska (65), as well as smaller spills in Texas, Rhode Island,
and the Delaware Bay (5), has refocused attention on the
problem of hydrocarbon contamination in the environment.
It is estimated that the annual global input of petroleum is
between 1.7 and 8.8 million metric tons, the majority of
which is derived from anthropogenic sources (95). Biodegradation
of hydrocarbons by natural populations of microorganisms
represents one of the primary mechanisms by which
petroleum and other hydrocarbon pollutants are eliminated
from the environment (95). The effects of environmental
parameters on the microbial degradation of hydrocarbons,
the elucidation of metabolic pathways and genetic bases for
hydrocarbon dissimilation by microorganisms, and the effects
of hydrocarbon contamination on microorganisms and
microbial communities have been areas of intense interest
and the subjects of several reviews (7, 9, 44, 95).
The intent of the present review is to present a broad and
updated overview of the microbial ecology of hydrocarbon
degradation, emphasizing both environmental and biological
factors which are involved in determining the rate at which
and extent to which hydrocarbons are removed from the
environment by biodegradation. Aspects of biodegradation
of petroleum and individual hydrocarbons in marine, freshwater,
and soil ecosystems are presented. It should be noted
that the majority of studies have been concerned with
degradation of oil in the marine environment, and this is
necessarily reflected, to a certain extent, in this review.
* Corresponding author.
Applications of relatively recent advances in molecular
biological techniques, such as the isolation of plasmid DNA
and the construction of DNA probes, to the study of
hydrocarbon degradation by microbial communities will be
discussed, as well as the use of natural or genetically
engineered microorganisms as seeds to increase rates of
biodegradation of hydrocarbon pollutants in the environment.
PHYSICAL AND CHEMICAL FACTORS AFFECTING
THE BIODEGRADATION OF HYDROCARBONS
Chemical Composition of the Oil or Hydrocarbons
Petroleum hydrocarbons can be divided into four classes:
the saturates, the aromatics, the asphaltenes (phenols, fatty
acids, ketones, esters, and porphyrins), and the resins (pyridines,
quinolines, carbazoles, sulfoxides, and amides) (44).
Hydrocarbons differ in their susceptibility to microbial attack
and, in the past, have generally been ranked in the
following order of decreasing susceptibility: n-alkanes >
branched alkanes > low-molecular-weight aromatics > cyclic
alkanes (104). Biodegradation rates have been shown to
be highest for the saturates, followed by the light aromatics,
with high-molecular-weight aromatics and polar compounds
exhibiting extremely low rates of degradation (59, 76, 145).
This pattern is not universal, however, as Cooney et al. (46)
reported greater degradation losses of naphthalene than of
hexadecane in water-sediment mixtures from a freshwater
lake and Jones et al. (78) observed extensive biodegradation
of alkylaromatics in marine sediments prior to detectable
changes in the n-alkane profile of the crude oil tested.
Fedorak and Westlake (53) also reported a more rapid attack
of aromatic hydrocarbons during the degradation of crude oil
by marine microbial populations from a pristine site and a
commercial harbor.
Horowitz and Atlas (71), using an in situ continuous-flow
system in a study of biodegradation in Arctic coastal waters,
and Bertrand et al. (26), using a continuous-culture fermentor
and a mixed culture of marine bacteria, observed degradation
of all fractions of crude oil at similar rates, in marked
contrast to the results of most other studies. In the latter
investigation, experimental conditions were optimized and
extensive losses of resins (52%) and asphaltenes (74%) were
observed. The microbial degradation of these fractions,
which have previously been considered relatively recalcitrant
to biodegradation (143), can be ascribed to cooxidation,
in which non-growth hydrocarbons are oxidized in the
presence of hydrocarbons which can serve as growth substrates
(103). Evidence for cooxidation of asphaltenes was
provided by Rontani et al. (114), who reported degradation
of asphaltenic compounds in mixed bacterial cultures to be
dependent upon the presence of n-alkanes 12 to 18 carbon
atoms in length.
Compositional heterogeneity among different crude oils
and refined products influences the overall rate of biodegradation
both of the oil and of its component fractions. Walker
et al. (147) compared the degradation of two crude and two
fuel oils by a mixed culture of estuarine bacteria. Lowsulfur,
high-saturate South Louisiana crude oil was the most
susceptible to microbial degradation, and high-sulfur, higharomatic
Bunker C fuel oil was the least susceptible. Percent
losses of saturated, aromatic, resinous, and asphaltenic
hydrocarbons were highly variable among the four oils.
Similarly, Jobson et al. (76) observed a greater degree of
degradation of "high-quality" North Cantal crude oil than of
Lost Horse Hill crude oil, which contained higher levels of
sulfur, aromatics, asphaltenes, and resins, when a mixed
culture enriched with the North Cantal oil was used. More
extensive biodegradation of the Lost Horse Hill oil occurred
when a mixed culture enriched with the same oil was used.
Physical State of the Oil or Hydrocarbons
Oil spilled in water tends to spread and form a slick (25).
As a result of wind and wave action, oil-in-water or waterin-oil
("mousse") emulsions may form (45). Dispersion of
hydrocarbons in the water column in the form of oil-in-water
emulsions increases the surface area of the oil and thus its
availability for microbial attack. However, large masses (or
plates) of mousse establish unfavorably low surface-tovolume
ratios, inhibiting biodegradation (49). Tarballs,
which are large aggregates of weathered and undegraded oil,
also restrict access by microorganisms because of their
limited surface area (43).
The formation of emulsions through the microbial production
and release of biosurfactants is an important process in
the uptake of hydrocarbons by bacteria and fungi (125).
Broderick and Cooney (32) reported that 96% of hydrocarbon-utilizing
bacteria isolated from freshwater lakes were
able to emulsify kerosene, and it has been observed that
mixed cultures of marine (108) and soil (77) bacteria which
effectively degrade crude oil also exhibit strong emulsifying
activity.
Artificial dispersants have been studied as a means of
increasing the surface area and hence the biodegradability of
oil slicks. Dispersant formulations used in the 1960s were
highly toxic, and their application to oiled intertidal areas
following the Torrey Canyon spill resulted in widespread
mortality of flora and fauna (48, 126). More recently developed
dispersants, such as Corexit, are considerably less
toxic (52), but still have been shown to inhibit microbial
processes (63). The effectiveness of dispersants in enhancing
the biodegradation of oil has been shown to be extremely
variable and to be dependent on the chemical formulation of
the dispersant, its concentration, and the dispersant/oil
application ratio. Studies with different dispersants have
reported increases (112), decreases (56, 93), and transitory
or slight increases (56, 93, 136) in the rates of microbial
degradation of crude oil and individual hydrocarbons.
The key differences between petroleum biodegradation in
soil and aquatic ecosystems following an oil spill, discussed
by Bossert and Bartha (29), are related to the movement and
distribution of the oil and the presence of particulate matter,
each of which affects the physical and chemical nature of the
oil and hence its susceptibility to microbial degradation.
Terrestrial oil spills are characterized primarily by vertical
movement of the oil into the soil, rather than the horizontal
spreading associated with slick formation. Infiltration of oil
into the soil prevents evaporative losses of volatile hydrocarbons,
which can be toxic to microorganisms. Particulate
matter can reduce, by absorption, the effective toxicity of
the components of petroleum, but absorption and adsorption
of hydrocarbons to humic substances probably contribute to
the formation of persistent residues.
Concentration of the Oil or Hydrocarbons
The rates of uptake and mineralization of many organic
compounds by microbial populations in the aquatic environment
are proportional to the concentration of the compound,
generally conforming to Michaelis-Menten kinetics (28, 105).
Michaelian kinetics have been demonstrated for the microbial
uptake and oxidation of toluene (35, 111), a lowmolecular-weight
aromatic hydrocarbon of relatively high
water solubility, but may not apply to the more insoluble
hydrocarbons. The rates of mineralization of the highermolecular-weight
aromatic hydrocarbons, such as naphthalene
and phenanthrene, are related to aqueous solubilities
rather than total substrate concentrations (135, 152, 153).
The microbial degradation of long (.C12) alkanes, for which
solubilities are less than 0.01 mg/liter (23), occurs at rates
which exceed the rates of hydrocarbon dissolution (135, 156)
and are a function of the hydrocarbon surface area available
for emulsification or physical attachment by cells (55, 94,
148). Biodegradation rates for many hydrocarbons, therefore,
will not display the dependence on concentration which
is typically observed with more soluble organic substrates.
High concentrations of hydrocarbons can be associated
with heavy, undispersed oil slicks in water, causing inhibition
of biodegradation by nutrient or oxygen limitation or
through toxic effects exerted by volatile hydrocarbons (see
below). Fusey and Oudot (59) reported that contamination of
seashore sediments with crude oil above a threshold concentration
prevented biodegradation of the oil because of
oxygen and/or nutrient limitation. It is likely that high
concentrations of oil have similarly negative effects on
biodegradation rates following oil spills in other quiescent,
low-energy environments such as beaches, harbors, and
small lakes or ponds, in which the oil is relatively protected
from dispersion by wind and wave action. Rashid (109), for
example, observed that the lowest rates of degradation of
crude oil spilled from an oil tanker occurred in protected
bays and the highest rates occurred in the areas of greatest
wave energy.
The concept of a maximum or threshold concentration for
MICROBIOL. REV.
BIODEGRADATION OF HYDROCARBONS IN THE ENVIRONMENT
microbial degradation of hydrocarbons may apply also to
soil ecosystems. Dibble and Bartha (51) reported increases
in CO2 evolution over the range of 1.25 to 5% hydrocarbon
mass per dry weight of soil, when oil sludge was applied to
soil. No increase was observed at a level of 10%, and the
rates declined at 15%. Decreases in activity at high oil
loading concentrations were ascribed to inhibition of microbial
activity by toxic components of the oil sludge.
Temperature
Temperature influences petroleum biodegradation by its
effect on the physical nature and chemical composition of
the oil, rate of hydrocarbon metabolism by microorganisms,
and composition of the microbial community (7). At low
temperatures, the viscosity of the oil increases, the volatilization
of toxic short-chain alkanes is reduced, and their
water solubility is increased, delaying the onset of biodegradation
(10). Rates of degradation are generally observed to
decrease with decreasing temperature; this is believed to be
a result primarily of decreased rates of enzymatic activity, or
the "Qlo" effect (10, 60). Higher temperatures increase the
rates of hydrocarbon metabolism to a maximum, typically in
the range of 30 to 40°C, above which the membrane toxicity
of hydrocarbons is increased (29). Thermophilic alkaneutilizing
bacteria do exist, however (85, 89).
Climate and season would be expected to select for
different populations of hydrocarbon-utilizing microorganisms
which are adapted to ambient temperatures. Colwell et
al. (43) reported extensive degradation of Metula crude oil
by mixed cultures of marine bacteria at 3°C, and Huddleston
and Cresswell (73) observed petroleum biodegradation in
soil at -1.1°C. By contrast, only negligible degradation of oil
was exhibited in Arctic marine ice (14) and in frozen tundra
soil (15). Low winter temperatures were the limiting factor
for the biodegradation of polyaromatic hydrocarbons in
estuarine sediment (124) and of a variety of hydrocarbons in
freshwater lakes (46).
Oxygen
The initial steps in the catabolism of aliphatic (125), cyclic
(104), and aromatic (37) hydrocarbons by bacteria and fungi
involve the oxidation of the substrate by oxygenases, for
which molecular oxygen is required. Aerobic conditions are
therefore necessary for this route of microbial oxidation of
hydrocarbons in the environment. Conditions of oxygen
limitation normally do not exist in the upper levels of the
water column in marine (54) and freshwater (45) environments.
Aquatic sediments, however, are generally anoxic
except for a thin layer at the surface of the sediment (45, 66).
The availability of oxygen in soils is dependent on rates of
microbial oxygen consumption, the type of soil, whether the
soil is waterlogged, and the presence of utilizable substrates
which can lead to oxygen depletion (29). The concentration
of oxygen has been identified as the rate-limiting variable in
the biodegradation of petroleum in soil (139) and of gasoline
in groundwater (74).
Anaerobic degradation of petroleum hydrocarbons by
microorganisms has been shown in some studies to occur
only at negligible rates (18, 74, 150), and its ecological
significance has been generally considered to be minor (7,
29, 45, 54). However, the microbial degradation of oxidized
aromatic compounds such as benzoate (134) and of halogenated
aromatic compounds such as the halobenzoates (131),
chlorophenols (30), and polychlorinated biphenyls (40) has
been shown to occur under anaerobic conditions. Recent
evidence also indicates that microbial consortia from soil
and sludge are capable of metabolizing unsubstituted and
alkyl-substituted aromatics, including benzene, toluene, xylene,
1,3-dimethylbenzene, acenaphthene, and naphthalene,
in the absence of molecular oxygen (62, 90, 91, 157).
Hydroxylation of the aromatic ring of toluene and benzene is
believed to depend on water as a source of oxygen (62).
Nitrate can act as the final electron acceptor under denitrifying
conditions (91, 157). The anaerobic transformation of
benzene and toluene under methanogenic conditions has
been tentatively characterized as a fermentation, in which
the substrate is partially oxidized and partially reduced,
yielding carbon dioxide and methane as end products (62).
The amount of substrate removed by anaerobic biodegradation
can be significant; at least 50% of benzene and toluene
were mineralized in 60 days under methanogenic conditions
(62), and naphthalene and acenaphthene were degraded to
nondetectable levels in 45 and 40 days, respectively, under
denitrifying conditions (91). The importance of anaerobic
biodegradation of aromatic hydrocarbons in the environment
is unknown, and further studies are required to elucidate
anaerobic pathways, as well as determine whether other
hydrocarbons, such as alkanes, and hydrocarbon mixtures,
such as crude oil, can be fully degraded under denitrifying or
methanogenic conditions.
Nutrients
The release of hydrocarbons into aquatic environments
which contain low concentrations of inorganic nutrients
often produces excessively high carbon/nitrogen or carbon/
phosphorus ratios, or both, which are unfavorable for microbial
growth (7, 45). It is well established that the availability
of nitrogen and phosphorus limits the microbial
degradation of hydrocarbons in estuarine water and sediment
(140), seawater (11), marine sediment (27), freshwater
lakes (149), Arctic ponds (24), freshwater sediments (46),
and groundwater (74). Adjustment of carbon/nitrogen/phosphorus
ratios by the addition of nitrogen and phosphorus in
the form of oleophilic fertilizers, including paraffinized urea,
octylphosphate, ferric octoate, paraffin-supported MgNH4
P04, and 2-ethylhexyldipolyethylene oxide phosphate, stimulates
the biodegradation of crude oil and individual hydrocarbons
in seawater and in Arctic ponds and lakes (12, 13, 24,
50, 71, 72, 100). Inorganic salts of nitrogen and phosphorus
are effective in enclosed systems (12, 13, 50, 72) but tend to
wash out in simulated field experiments (12, 13).
Nitrogen and phosphorus may also be limiting in soils, and
the acceleration of the biodegradation of crude oil or gasoline
in soil and groundwater by the addition of urea-phosphate,
N-P-K fertilizers, and ammonium and phosphate salts
has been demonstrated in several studies (51, 74, 77, 138).
Other investigators observed no increase in biodegradation
rates (87) or an increase only after a delay of several months
to a year (97, 110) when fertilizer amendments were used.
These seemingly contradictory results have been attributed
by Bossert and Bartha (29) to the variable and complex
composition of soils and to other factors such as nitrogen
reserves and the presence of nitrogen-fixing bacteria.
Salinity
There are few published studies which deal with effects of
salinity on the microbial degradation of hydrocarbons. Shiaris
(124) reported a generally positive correlation between
VOL. 54, 1990 307
 on July 17, 2017 by INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY NEW DELHI http://mmbr.asm.org/ Downloaded from 
308 LEAHY AND COLWELL
salinity and rates of mineralization of phenanthrene and
naphthalene in estuarine sediments. Kerr and Capone (82)
observed a relationship between the naphthalene mineralization
rate and salinity in sediments of the Hudson river that
was dependent upon the ambient salinity regime, with estuarine
sites exhibiting a lack of inhibition of mineralization
over a wider range of salinities than was the case for the less
saline upstream site. In a study of hypersaline salt evaporation
ponds, Ward and Brock (151) showed that rates of
hydrocarbon metabolism decreased with increasing salinity
in the range 3.3 to 28.4% and attributed the results to a
general reduction in microbial metabolic rates.
Pressure
The importance of pressure as a variable in the biodegradation
of hydrocarbons is most probably confined to the
deep-sea environment. Reports of the effects of pressure
have been limited to the studies conducted by Schwarz et al.
(120-122) in which the degradation of tetradecane, hexadecane,
and a mixed hydrocarbon substrate by a mixed culture
of deep-sea sediment bacteria was monitored at 1 atm (ca.
101 kPa) and 495 or 500 atm (ca. 50,140 or 50,650 kPa). At
4°C, 94% of the hexadecane was utilized only after a 40-week
incubation under conditions of high pressure, compared with
8 weeks at 1 atm (122). Colwell and Walker (44) have
suggested that oil which reaches the deep-ocean environment
will be degraded very slowly by microbial populations
and, consequently, that certain recalcitrant fractions of the
oil could persist for years or decades.
Water Activity
The water activity or water potential (a,,) of soils can
range from 0.0 to 0.99, in contrast to aquatic environments,
in which water activity is stable at a value near 0.98 (29).
Hydrocarbon biodegradation in terrestrial ecosystems may
therefore be limited by the available water for microbial
growth and metabolism. Dibble and Bartha (51), in a study of
oil sludge degradation in soil, reported optimal rates of
biodegradation at 30 to 90% water saturation. The failure to
observe inhibition of degradation at the lower values was
ascribed to a hydrocarbon-mediated reduction in the waterholding
capacity of the soil.
Atlas (7) has suggested that tarballs deposited on beaches
may represent another situation in which available water
limits hydrocarbon biodegradation.
pH
In contrast to most aquatic ecosystems, soil pH can be
highly variable, ranging from 2.5 in mine spoils to 11.0 in
alkaline deserts (29). Most heterotrophic bacteria and fungi
favor a pH near neutrality, with fungi being more tolerant of
acidic conditions (8). Extremes in pH, as can be observed in
some soils, would therefore be expected to have a negative
influence on the ability of microbial populations to degrade
hydrocarbons. Verstraete et al. (138) reported a near doubling
of rates of biodegradation of gasoline in an acidic (pH
4.5) soil by adjusting the pH to 7.4. Rates dropped significantly,
however, when the pH was further raised to 8.5.
Similarly, Dibble and Bartha (51) observed an optimal pH of
7.8, in the range 5.0 to 7.8, for the mineralization of oily
sludge in soil.
The pH of sediments in special environments such as salt
marshes may be as low as 5.0 in some cases (102). Hambrick
et al. (66) found the rates of microbial mineralization of
octadecane and napthalene to be depressed at this pH
compared with pH 6.5. Octadecane mineralization rates
increased further when the pH was raised from 6.5 to 8.0,
whereas naphthalene mineralization rates did not.
BIOLOGICAL FACTORS AFFECTING THE
BIODEGRADATION OF HYDROCARBONS
Hydrocarbon Degradation by Bacteria, Fungi,
and Other Microorganisms
Hydrocarbons in the environment are biodegraded primarily
by the bacteria and fungi. Although ubiquitous in' terrestrial
(16, 79) and aquatic (33, 92, 149) ecosystems, the
fraction of the total heterotrophic community represented by
the hydrocarbon-utilizing bacteria and fungi is highly variable,
with reported frequencies ranging from 6% (80) to 82%
(106) for soil fungi, 0.13% (80) to 50% (106) for soil bacteria,
and 0.003% (69) to 100% (92) for marine bacteria. Individual
organisms can metabolize only a limited range of hydrocarbon
substrates (31), so that assemblages of mixed populations
with overall broad enzymatic capacities are required to
degrade complex mixtures of hydrocarbons such as crude oil
in soil (29), freshwater (45), and marine (7, 54) environments.
The ability to degrade and/or utilize hydrocarbon substrates
is exhibited by a wide variety of bacterial and fungal
genera. Floodgate (54) lists 25 genera of hydrocarbon-degrading
bacteria and 27 genera of hydrocarbon-degrading
fungi which have been isolated from the marine environment;
a similar compilation by Bossert and Bartha (29) for
soil isolates includes 22 genera of bacteria and 31 genera of
fungi. Based on the number of published reports, the most
important hydrocarbon-degrading bacteria in both marine
and soil environments are Achromobacter, Acinetobacter,
Alcaligenes, Arthrobacter, Bacillus, Flavobacterium, Nocardia,
and Pseudomonas spp. and the coryneforms; the
importance of hydrocarbon-degrading strains of the saltrequiring
Vibrio spp. is limited to the marine'environment.
Austin et al. (17), in a numerical taxonomy study of petroleum-degrading
bacteria from Chesapeake Bay water and
sediment, found that Pseudomonas, Micrococcus, and Nocardia
spp., members of the family Enterobacteriaceae,
acti'nomycetes, and coryneforms made up 95% of the isolates.
Among the fungi, Aureobasidium, Candida, Rhodotorula,
and Sporobolomyces spp. are the most common
marine isolates and Trichoderma and Mortierella spp. are
the most common soil isolates. Hydrocarbon-degrading Aspergillus
and Penicillium spp. have been frequently isolated
from both environments. Based on the work of Kirk and
Gordon (84), the truly marine, beach-adapted genera Corollospora,
Dendryphiella, Lulworthia, and Varicosporina
should be added to the list.
The extent to which bacteria, yeasts, and filamentous
fungi participate in the biodegradation of hydrocarbons has
been the subject of only limited study, but appears to be a
function of the ecosystem and local environmental conditions.
In the marine environment, bacteria are generally considered
to represent the predominant hydrocarbon-degrading
element of the microbial community. Floodgate (54) suggested
that fungi were relatively minor components of the
marine microflora, increasing in numbers in nearshore regions
(3, 4), the intertidal zone (84, 107), and salt marshes
and mangrove areas (3). Fungi have also been reported to be
important inhabitants of specialized niches such as subMICROBIOL.
REV.
 on July 17, 2017 by INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY NEW DELHI http://mmbr.asm.org/ Downloaded from 
BIODEGRADATION OF HYDROCARBONS IN THE ENVIRONMENT
merged wood (84), the surface film of water, decomposing
algae, and the surface of tarballs (2). Few studies, though,
have directly compared the degrees of hydrocarbon degradation
accomplished by bacteria and fungi in the marine
environment. Walker and Colwell (140) reported that Chesapeake
Bay bacteria accounted for all of the utilization of a
model petroleum at 0 and 5°C; at 10°C, yeasts but not
filamentous fungi contributed to the utilization of the petroleum.
A hydrocarbon-degrading fungus, Cladosporium resinae,
was responsible for 20 to 40% of the degradation of
petroleum when added to the inoculum. Ahearn and Meyers
(3) found that populations of yeasts increased in oil-contaminated
estuarine sediments over a 4-month period, but declined
in open-ocean waters despite the presence of oil.
Ahearn and Crow (1) observed relatively small numbers of
yeasts associated with crude oil after the Amoco Cadiz spill
in the North Sea.
Even less is known of the comparative roles of bacteria
and fungi in degrading hydrocarbons in freshwater ecosystems.
Yeasts are at least an order of magnitude more
abundant in rivers and lakes than in the open ocean, and the
frequency of molds is generally higher in freshwater than
seawater samples (3). Cooney and Summers (47) reported
100-fold-greater numbers of hydrocarbon-utilizing bacteria
than yeasts and filamentous fungi in sediments from freshwater
lakes, but the relative amounts of biomass of the two
groups were considered to be nearly equal.
Both bacteria and fungi are relatively plentiful in soil, and
members of both groups contribute to the biodegradation of
hydrocarbons (29). Hydrocarbon-utilizing bacteria (16, 75,
106) and fungi (16, 88, 106) are readily isolated from soil, and
the application of oil or oily wastes to soil results in
increased numbers of bacteria and fungi (75, 88, 106). In the
only published comparative study of hydrocarbon degradation
by bacteria and fungi in soil, Song et al. (127) observed
that 82% of n-hexadecane mineralization in a sandy loam
was attributed to bacteria and only 13% was attributed to
fungi.
Algae and protozoa are important members of the microbial
community in both aquatic and terrestrial ecosystems,
but the extent of their involvement in hydrocarbon biodegradation
is largely unknown. Walker et al. (146) isolated an
alga, Prototheca zopfi, which was capable of utilizing crude
oil and a mixed-hydrocarbon substrate and exhibited extensive
degradation of n- and isoalkanes, as well as aromatic
hydrocarbons. Cerniglia et al. (38) observed that nine cyanobacteria,
five green algae, one red alga, one brown alga,
and two diatoms could oxidize naphthalene. Protozoa, by
contrast, have not been shown to utilize hydrocarbons.
Rogerson and Berger (113) found no direct utilization of
crude oil by protozoa cultured on hydrocarbon-utilizing
yeasts and bacteria. Overall, the limited available evidence
does not appear to suggest an ecologically significant role for
algae and protozoa in the degradation of hydrocarbons in the
environment (29, 96).
Adaptation-Effect of Prior Exposure
Prior exposure of a microbial community to hydrocarbons,
either from anthropogenic sources such as accidental
oil spills, petroleum exploration and transportation activities,
and waste oil disposal, or from natural sources such as
seeps and plant-derived hydrocarbons (21, 95), is important
in determining how rapidly subsequent hydrocarbon inputs
can be biodegraded. This phenomenon, which results from
increases in the hydrocarbon-oxidizing potential of the community,
is known as adaptation (128). The three interrelated
mechanisms by which adaptation can occur are (i) induction
and/or depression of specific enzymes, (ii) genetic changes
which result in new metabolic capabilities, and (iii) selective
enrichment of organisms able to transform the compound or
compounds of interest (128, 129). Selective enrichment has
been widely observed in studies of hydrocarbon and petroleum
degradation in the environment. A large number of
reports, reviewed by Colwell and Walker (44), Atlas (7),
Floodgate (54), Cooney (45), and Bossert and Bartha (29),
have shown that the numbers of hydrocarbon-utilizing
microorganisms and their proportion in the heterotrophic
community increase upon exposure to petroleum or other
hydrocarbon pollutants and that the levels of hydrocarbonutilizing
microorganisms generally reflect the degree of contamination
of the ecosystem. In some cases, this phenomenon
has been associated with the predominance of a few
hydrocarbon-degrading genera (88), whereas in other studies
the diversity of heterotrophic populations was shown to be
unchanged (42, 69, 101, 106) or even to increase (70). The
specific effect of hydrocarbon contamination on the generic
composition of the microbial community would be expected
to exhibit a strong dependence on the environment and local
conditions, which may explain these apparently conflicting
observations.
Adaptation of microbial communities to hydrocarbons,
i.e., increases in rates of transformation of hydrocarbons
associated with oil-contaminated environments, has been
reported in several studies. Walker et al. observed greater
degradation of a mixed-hydrocarbon substrate (141) and
South Louisiana crude oil (144) by sediment bacteria from an
oil-polluted harbor than by bacteria from a relatively unpolluted
environment. Uptake and mineralization rates of
['4C]hexadecane were also higher for planktonic bacteria
from the polluted site (142). Similarly, Caparello and LaRock
(36), in a study of mineralization of ['4C]hexadecane
and degradation of n-alkane mixtures by bacteria in several
surface water and sand samples, concluded that areas with
greater hydrocarbon burdens had higher hydrocarbon-oxidizing
activity. Herbes and Schwall (67) reported that turnover
times for naphthalene, anthracene, benzo[a]anthracene,
and benzo[a]pyrene were 10 to 400 times longer in
sediments of a pristine freshwater stream than in petroleumcontaminated
sediments. Sherrill and Sayler (123) observed
increased phenanthrene-biodegradative capacity in water
samples from two reservoirs receiving industrial and domestic
wastes compared with a reservoir not receiving wastes.
Wyndham and Costerton (155) concluded that sediment
microbial populations within the Athabasca oil sands were
more capable of oxidizing hydrocarbons than were populations
from control sites, based on respiration rates of radiolabeled
hexadecane and naphthalene. Sayler et al. (117)
showed that exposure of freshwater sediments to a synthetic
oil accelerated the rate of polyaromatic hydrocarbon (PAH)
mineralization. Cooney et al. (46) found that water-sediment
mixtures from an oil-contaminated area of a freshwater lake
exhibited higher rates of degradation of marker hydrocarbons
in kerosene than did samples from the non-oiled area of
the lake.
Bauer and Capone (22) and Kerr and Capone (82) provided
evidence for "cross-acclimation" of sediment microbial
communities to PAHs, in which exposure to one compound,
such as phenanthrene, effects an increase in metabolism
rates of a compound of similar structure, such as naphthalene.
The occurrence of this phenomenon was attributed to
the broad specificity of selected microbial populations for
VOL. 54, 1990 309
 on July 17, 2017 by INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY NEW DELHI http://mmbr.asm.org/ Downloaded from 
310 LEAHY AND COLWELL
PAHs and/or the existence of common pathways for PAH
catabolism (22). The increase in transformation rates of
naphthalene, phenanthrene, and benzo[a]pyrene with increasing
ambient concentrations of PAHs, reported by Shiaris
(124) for sediments of a polluted estuary, probably
represents another example of cross-acclimation.
Adaptation by Alteration of the Genetic Composition of the
Microbial Community
Of the three mechanisms for adaptation of microbial
communities to chemical contaminants, induction and derepression
of enzymes, genetic changes, and selective enrichment,
only the third has been examined in detail, as discussed
in the previous section. This has been primarily a
result of limitations imposed by available methods, which
have, until recently, restricted the study of adaptation of
microbial communities to the phenomenon of selective enrichment,
in which the numbers or proportion of microorganisms
that can utilize the compound of interest increase
within the community and can be enumerated by their ability
to grow on a medium containing the compound as the sole
carbon source.
The primary genetic mechanism for the adaptation of the
microbial community is the amplification, by means of
selective enrichment and gene transfer and mutation, of
genes which are involved in the metabolism of the chemical
contaminant (19, 129). Direct monitoring of this process with
respect to adaptation to hydrocarbons has recently been
made possible by the development of DNA probes specific
for the genes encoding hydrocarbon-catabolic pathways
(137). Sayler et al. (118), for example, using the colony
hybridization technique, showed a correlation between the
enhanced rates of PAH mineralization in oil-contaminated
sediments and an increase in the number of colonies containing
DNA sequences which hybridized to TOL (toluate
oxidation) and NAH (naphthalene oxidation) plasmid
probes. The colony hybridization procedure, however, has
the disadvantage of requiring the growth of organisms on
laboratory media, which limits sensitivity and does not allow
detection of DNA sequences in viable but nonculturable
microorganisms (116). Dot blot hybridization, in which DNA
is extracted from environmental samples and then probed
(68, 98), can be used to detect specific DNA sequences in the
environment without the need for isolation and culture of
microorganisms. The newly described polymerase chain
reaction technique can improve the sensitivity of the dot blot
method by 3 orders of magnitude, permitting the detection of
1 cell per g of sediment sample (130).
The use of these methods in conjunction with nucleic acid
probes for genes involved in hydrocarbon metabolism will
allow measurement of the frequency of those genes within
the microbial community (137). This will permit assessment
of the relative degree of adaptation of the community as well
as a more detailed analysis of the dynamics of gene amplification
associated with adaptation.
Role of Plasmids in Adaptation
Plasmid DNA may play a particularly important role in
genetic adaptation in that it represents a highly mobile form
of DNA which can be transferred via conjugation or transformation
and can impart novel phenotypes, including hydrocarbon-oxidizing
ability, to recipient organisms. The
pathways for the metabolism of naphthalene, salicylate,
camphor, octane, xylene, and toluene have been shown to
be encoded on plasmids in Pseudomonas spp. (39). Exposure
of natural microbial populations to oil or other hydrocarbons
may impose a selective advantage to strains possessing
plasmids encoding enzymes for hydrocarbon
catabolism, resulting in an overall increase in the plasmid
frequency in the community.
Indirect evidence for the role of plasmids in adaptation to
hydrocarbons has been provided by some studies in which a
greater frequency and/or multiplicity of plasmids has been
observed among bacterial isolates from hydrocarbon-contaminated
environments than among isolates from uncontaminated
sites. Hada and Sizemore (64) screened 440 Vibrio
isolates from an active oil field and a control site in the
northwestern Gulf of Mexico for the presence of plasmid
DNA and found a higher proportion of plasmid carriage (35
versus 23%) and multiple plasmid carriage (58 versus 29%)
for oil field isolates than for isolates from the control site.
The average number of plasmids per plasmid-carrying strain
was 2.5 and 1.5 for oil field and control site strains, respectively.
By contrast, Leahy et al. (86), in a study of bacteria
isolated from sediments in the Campeche Bank region of the
Gulf of Mexico, concluded that there was no clear association
between plasmid frequency or multiplicity and proximity
to an oil field, but, rather, a positive correlation with the
depth of the site from which the sediment was sampled. The
failure to observe a higher incidence of plasmid-bearing
bacteria within the oil field was attributed to the relatively
low degree of oil contamination in the region at the time of
the study. Burton et al. (34) reported that 15% of the aerobic,
heterotrophic bacteria isolated from the sediment of a river
receiving domestic and industrial effluents carried plasmids,
compared with 10% of the bacteria from an unpolluted area
upstream. Ogunseitan et al. (99) observed a higher frequency
(19.4%) of plasmid-bearing bacterial isolates from an aquifer
with a history of aromatic hydrocarbon contamination than
from two pristine aquifers (1.8 and 7.7%). Fredrickson et al.
(57) found that bacterial isolates from the deeper layers (29
to 260 m) of terrestrial sediments exhibited a higher incidence
of plasmids (31 to 39%) than those from the surface
soil (14%) or the shallow aquifer (16%). They hypothesized
that the large plasmids associated with bacteria from the
deeper strata, some of which hybridized to a TOL plasmid
probe, contained genes encoding aromatic compound catabolism.
Schutt (119) observed a similar proportion of plasmid
carriage (34%) among the bacterial isolates from a dystrophic
lake containing high concentrations of humic compounds.
To confirm the participation of plasmid DNA in the
genetic changes of the microbial community during adaptation,
further studies are necessary to identify the functions of
plasmids associated with bacteria indigenous to hydrocarbon-containing
environments.
Seeding
Seeding involves the introduction of allochthonous microorganisms
into the natural environment for the purpose of
increasing the rate or extent, or both, of biodegradation of
pollutants. The rationale for this approach is that the autochthonous
microbial populations may not be capable of degrading
the wide range of potential substrates present in complex
mixtures such as petroleum. The criteria to be met by
effective seed organisms have been reviewed by Atlas (6)
and include the ability to degrade most petroleum components,
genetic stability, viability during storage, rapid
growth following storage, a high degree of enzymatic activity
and growth in the environment, the ability to compete with
MICROBIOL. REV.
 on July 17, 2017 by INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY NEW DELHI http://mmbr.asm.org/ Downloaded from 
BIODEGRADATION OF HYDROCARBONS IN THE ENVIRONMENT
indigenous microorganisms, nonpathogenicity, and the inability
to produce toxic metabolites.
Mixed cultures have been most commonly used as inocula
for seeding because of the relative ease with which microorganisms
with different and complementary hydrocarbondegrading
capabilities can be isolated. The potential for
creating, through genetic manipulation, microbial strains
able to degrade a variety of different types of hydrocarbons
has been demonstrated by Friello et al. (58). They successfully
produced a multiplasmid-containing Pseudomonas
strain capable of oxidizing aliphatic, aromatic, terpenic, and
polyaromatic hydrocarbons. The use of such a strain as an
inoculum during seeding would preclude the problems associated
with competition between strains in a mixed culture.
However, there is considerable controversy surrounding the
release of such genetically engineered microorganisms into
the environment, and field testing of these organisms must
therefore be delayed until the issues of safety, containment,
and the potential for ecological damage are resolved (132).
Seeding of petroleum-contaminated aquatic environments
has been attempted, with mixed results. Tagger et al. (133)
observed no increase in petroleum degradation in seawater
inoculated with a mixed culture of hydrocarbon-degrading
bacteria. Atlas and Busdosh (13) reported increased degradation
of oil in a saline Arctic pond after inoculation with an
oil-degrading Pseudomonas sp., but no improvement in a
freshwater pond. Horowitz and Atlas (72) found that greater
losses of oil in seawater in an open flow-through system
occurred when octadecane-coated bacteria were applied 2
weeks after the addition of an oleophilic fertilizer to the
system than when the fertilizer alone was added. In the same
study, no significant increases in the loss of gasoline from
freshwater sediment were produced by seeding. Rosenberg
et al. (115) were able to demonstrate removal of residual oil
from the ballast tanks of oil tankers by microbial seeding,
although removal appeared to result primarily from bioemulsification
rather than biodegradation.
Terrestrial ecosystems differ from aquatic ecosystems in
that soils contain higher concentrations of organic and
inorganic matter and, generally, larger numbers of microorganisms
and are more variable in terms of physical and
chemical conditions (29). The microbial community of soils
usually includes a significant hydrocarbon-utilizing component,
which readily increases in response to hydrocarbon
contamination (16, 75, 88, 106). The presence of indigenous
microbial populations which are highly adapted to a particular
soil environment would be expected to influence negatively
the ability of seed microorganisms to compete successfully
and survive; for this reason, soils are not widely
considered to be amenable to improvements in rates of
biodegradation though seeding alone (6, 29). Other potential
problems associated with the inoculation of soils, reviewed
by Goldstein et al. (61), include inadequate (i.e., extremely
low) concentrations of the chemical of interest, the presence
of inhibitory substances, predation, preferential metabolism
of competing organic substrates, and insufficient movement
of the seed organisms within the soil. Addition of selected
pure cultures of bacteria to soil has been found to increase
the rate of degradation of pesticides such as isopropyl
N-phenylcarbamate (41), 2,4,5-trichlorophenoxyacetic acid
(83), DDT (dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane) (81), and parathion
(20). Similar attempts by Jobson et al. (77), Lehtomaki
and Niemela (87), and Verstraete et al. (138) to enhance
the biodegradation of hydrocarbons in soils were unsuccessful.
The best results from seeding experiments have been
reported in studies in which the environment is controlled to
some extent, such as in fermentors and chemostats. The
advantages of such arrangements are clear: competition with
autochthonous microflora is reduced or nonexistent, and
system parameters can be optimized to achieve the highest
rates of biodegradation. The disadvantages are economic
costs associated with equipment and equipment transport,
energy input, and the impracticality of treating spills in some
environments (e.g., uncontained oil slicks) in a closed or
semicontained system (6). This approach has been used with
some success in the biodegradation of crude oil in seawater
(26) and in the in situ bioremediation of hydrocarboncontaminated
soil and groundwater (139). Microbial seeding
from a chemostat has also been used in conjunction with
conventional activated-sludge treatment to improve the ability
of a refinery wastewater treatment plant to absorb
intermittently high loads of hydrocarbons (154). The combination
of microbial seeding with conventional large-scale
treatment methods to improve the removal of hydrocarbons
is therefore feasible and merits additional study.
CONCLUSIONS
The biodegradation of petroleum and other hydrocarbons
in the environment is a complex process, whose quantitative
and qualitative aspects depend on the nature and amount of
the oil or hydrocarbons present, the ambient and seasonal
environmental conditions, and the composition of the autochthonous
microbial community. Microbial degradation of
oil has been shown to occur by attack on aliphatic or light
aromatic fractions of the oil, with high-molecular-weight
aromatics, resins, and asphaltenes considered to be recalcitrant
or exhibiting only very low rates of biodegradation,
although some studies have reported their removal at high
rates under optimal conditions. In aquatic ecosystems, dispersion
and emulsification of oil in oil slicks appear to be
prerequisites for rapid biodegradation; large masses of
mousse, tarballs, or high concentrations of oil in quiescent
environments tend to persist because of low surface areas
available for microbial activity. Petroleum spilled on or
applied to soil is largely adsorbed to particulate matter,
decreasing its toxicity but possibly also contributing to its
persistence. Biodegradation rates generally increase with
increasing temperature; ecosystems exposed to extremely
low temperatures degrade hydrocarbons very slowly. The
microbial degradation of petroleum in aquatic environments
is limited primarily by nutrients such as nitrogen and phosphorus;
salinity and pressure may be important in estuarine
and deep-sea regions, respectively. Oxygen, nutrient concentrations,
moisture, and pH are predominant factors in
determining biodegradation rates in soil.
Hydrocarbon degradation by microbial communities depends
on the composition of the community and its adaptive
response to the presence of hydrocarbons. Bacteria and
fungi are the key agents of degradation, with bacteria assuming
the dominant role in marine ecosystems and fungi
becoming more important in freshwater and terrestrial environments.
Adapted communities, i.e., those which have
been previously exposed to hydrocarbons, exhibit higher
biodegradation rates than communities with no history of
hydrocarbon contamination. The mechanisms of adaptation
include both selective enrichment and genetic changes,
resulting in a net increase in the number of hydrocarbonutilizing
organisms and in the pool of hydrocarbon-catabolizing
genes within the community. The association of such
genes with plasmid DNA may also lead to an increased
VOL. 54, 1990 311
 on July 17, 2017 by INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY NEW DELHI http://mmbr.asm.org/ Downloaded from 
312 LEAHY AND COLWELL
frequency of plasmid-bearing microorganisms. Seeding of
petroleum-contaminated water or soils with hydrocarbonutilizing
bacteria has met with some success, particularly in
situations in which chemostats or fermentors have been used
to control conditions and reduce competition from indigenous
microflora.
Probably the most significant recent developments in
hydrocarbon biodegradation ecology involve the demonstration
of anaerobic metabolism of aromatic hydrocarbons and
application of DNA probes to the analysis of genetic adaptation
of microbial communities upon exposure to aromatic
hydrocarbons. The expansion of the DNA probe method to
the detection of genes encoding the catabolism of other
classes of hydrocarbons, as well as to the detection of
specific RNAs, should revolutionize the study of the microbial
degradation of hydrocarbons in the environment and
remove many of the biases and limitations imposed by
conventional culture techniques. Recombinant DNA technology
may also allow the construction of bacterial and
fungal strains exhibiting improved capability for hydrocarbon
metabolism and suitability as seed organisms for the
elimination of hydrocarbon pollutants, but field studies must
await the resolution of the issue of release of genetically
engineered microorganisms into the environment.
