9A
Hydrogeology Journal (2000) 8 : 63±76  Springer-Verlag
Microbial populations in contaminant plumes
Sheridan K. Haack ´ Barbara A. Bekins
Abstract Efficient biodegradation of subsurface contaminants
requires two elements: (1) microbial populations
with the necessary degradative capabilities, and
(2) favorable subsurface geochemical and hydrological
conditions. Practical constraints on experimental
design and interpretation in both the hydrogeological
and microbiological sciences have resulted in limited
knowledge of the interaction between hydrogeological
and microbiological features of subsurface environments.
These practical constraints include: (1) inconsistencies
between the scales of investigation in the
hydrogeological and microbiological sciences, and (2)
practical limitations on the ability to accurately define
microbial populations in environmental samples. However,
advances in application of small-scale sampling
methods and interdisciplinary approaches to site investigations
are beginning to significantly improve understanding
of hydrogeological and microbiological
interactions. Likewise, culture-based and molecular
analyses of microbial populations in subsurface contaminant
plumes have revealed significant adaptation
of microbial populations to plume environmental conditions.
Results of recent studies suggest that variability
in subsurface geochemical and hydrological
conditions significantly influences subsurface microbial-community
structure. Combined investigations of
site conditions and microbial-community structure
provide the knowledge needed to understand interactions
between subsurface microbial populations,
plume geochemistry, and contaminant biodegradation.
RØsumØ La biodØgradation efficace des polluants
souterrains requiert deux ØlØments: des populations
microbiennes possØdant les aptitudes nØcessaires à la
dØgradation, et des conditions gØochimiques et hydrologiques
souterraines favorables. Des contraintes pratiques
sur la conception et l'interprØtation des
expØriences à la fois en microbiologie et en hydrogØologie
ont conduit à une connaissance limitØe des interactions
entre les phØnom›nes hydrogØologiques et
microbiologiques des environnements souterrains. Ces
contraintes pratiques sont dues à des contradictions
entre les Øchelles d'Øtude de l'hydrogØologie et de la
microbiologie et à des limitations pratiques sur la
capacitØ à dØfinir avec prØcision les populations microbiennes
dans les Øchantillons. Cependant, des progr›s
dans l'application de mØthodes d'Øchantillonnage à
l'Øchelle locale et des approches pluridisciplinaires des
Øtudes de terrain ont commencØ à amØliorer de façon
significative notre comprØhension des interactions
hydrogØologiques et microbiologiques. De plus, les
analyses molØculaires et sur les cultures des populations
microbiennes prØsentes dans les panaches de pollution
souterraine ont mis en Øvidence une adaptation
significative de ces populations aux conditions environnementales
du panache. Les rØsultats d'Øtudes
rØcentes laissent penser que la variabilitØ des conditions
gØochimiques et hydrologiques souterraines
influence significativement la structure des communautØs
microbiennes souterraines. Des recherches
combinØes sur les conditions de terrain et sur la structure
des communautØs microbiennes apportent les
informations nØcessaires à la comprØhension des interactions
entre les populations microbiennes souterraines,
la gØochimie du panache et la biodØgradation du
polluant.
Resumen Para que la biodegradación de los contaminantes
en el subsuelo sea eficiente se requiere: (1) una
población microbiana con capacidad de degradación y
(2) unas condiciones hidrológicas y geoquímicas favorables.
Las restricciones de tipo prµctico en los diseæos
y la interpretación de experimentos, tanto hidrogeoló-
gicos como microbiológicos, han dado lugar a un
conocimiento limitado de la interrelación entre estas
dos ciencias por lo que respecta al subsuelo. Estas restricciones
incluyen: (1) inconsistencias entre las escalas
de investigación en ambas ciencias (hidrogeología y
microbiología) y (2) limitaciones prµcticas para definir
poblaciones microbianas en las muestras. Sin embargo,
Received, May 1999
Revised, October 1999
Accepted, October 1999
Sheridan K. Haack ())
US Geological Survey, 6520 Mercantile Way, Suite 5
Lansing, Michigan 48911, USA
Fax: +1-517-887-8937
e-mail: skhaack@usgs.gov
Barbara A. Bekins
US Geological Survey, MS 496, 345 Middlefield Road
Menlo Park, California 94025, USA
Hydrogeology Journal (2000) 8 : 63±76  Springer-Verlag
64
los avances en la aplicación de mØtodos de muestreo a
pequeæa escala y las investigaciones de campo con
equipos interdisciplinares estµn mejorando significativamente
el conocimiento de las interacciones entre
hidrogeología y microbiología. Del mismo modo, los
anµlisis moleculares y de cultivos sobre poblaciones
microbianas en penachos contaminados han mostrado
la adaptación de los microbios a las condiciones naturales.
Estudios recientes sugieren que la variabilidad
en las condiciones geoquímicas e hidrogeológicas del
subsuelo afecta enormemente la estructura de la
comunidad microbiana. Las investigaciones que combinan
las condiciones del medio con la estructura de
la comunidad microbiana proporcionarµn el conocimiento
necesario para entender las complejas relaciones
entre las poblaciones microbianas subsuperficiales,
la geoquímica de los penachos de contaminación y la
biodegradación de los contaminantes.
Key words microbial processes ´ contamination ´
bioremediation ´ natural attenuation ´ heterogeneity
Introduction
Subsurface contaminant plumes comprise environments
in which many microbial processes are accelerated.
Sharp geochemical and biodegradative
gradients in these plumes provide contrasting conditions
for field and laboratory studies (Smith 1997).
Because of the practical importance of contaminant
biodegradation in the subsurface, some contaminant
plumes have been studied intensively and for long
periods of time (e.g., Madsen et al. 1996; Smith et al.
1996; Bekins et al. 1999; Ludvigsen et al. 1999). These
studies serve as models for general understanding of
subsurface microbial ecology. Some studies address
how microbial diversity and abundance influence subsurface
processes. They examine how unique aspects
of microbial metabolism, genetic structure, and community
organization can influence degradation processes.
Other studies have examined how environmental
controls influence microbial-community structure
and function. Recent results suggest that variability in
subsurface geochemical and hydrologic conditions significantly
influences the subsurface microbial-community
structure. Variations in the rate, mechanism,
and completeness of biodegradative processes from
one site to another indicate that increased understanding
of the subsurface as a microbial habitat is needed
to achieve a practical categorization of sites in terms
of their remediation potential. A high level of detail
and an interdisciplinary approach are required to
address these issues.
Efficient biodegradation of subsurface contaminants
requires (1) the presence of microbial populations
with the necessary degradative capabilities, and
(2) favorable subsurface geochemical and hydrologic
conditions. The purpose of this paper is to review current
understanding of how microbial and environmental
interactions affect biodegradation in contaminant
plumes. Thus, two themes are addressed: (1) adaptation
of microbial communities to contaminant plumes,
and (2) the influence of subsurface conditions on
microbial processes. The review is restricted to longterm
investigations of contaminated sites and contaminants
for which multiple studies have been conducted.
The focus is on non-manipulated systems and experiments
that were conducted either in situ or under
conditions representative of a site. By concentrating
on these types of studies, the relations between subsurface
environmental variables and the nature and
activities of microorganisms in contaminant plumes
are examined. Increased understanding of how microorganisms
respond to subsurface conditions is needed
to interpret variations in biodegradation rate and
extent at each site. Eventually, knowledge of processes
controlling subsurface microbial activity could be used
to evaluate the reasons for success or failure of
bioremediation at individual sites. Ideally, broad
groupings of biodegradative capacity of subsurface
environments is possible on the basis of geological,
hydrological, and microbiological data. This information
is also expected to be important in the design
of adequate long-term monitoring schemes or development
of bioaugmentation methods for plume remediation.
Background
Knowledge of microbial processes in the subsurface
draws heavily from almost a century of investigations
of soil and aquatic microbiology and wastewater
treatment (Ford 1993; Hurst et al. 1997). Subsurface
samples, however, are difficult and expensive to
obtain, so basic information on the numbers, types,
and activities of microorganisms is not available for a
diverse array of subsurface environments. Thus, the
fundamental principles that govern microbial abundance,
diversity, interactions, and activity in subsurface
environments remain largely unknown (Chapelle
1993; Madsen and Ghiorse 1993; Lovley and Chapelle
1995; Amy and Haldeman 1997; Fredrickson and
Fletcher 1999).
Principles describing the influence of surface environmental
factors, such as pH, temperature, nutrient
availability, and physical structure on abundance,
diversity, activity, and function of microbial communities,
are transferable, in some cases, to subsurface
environments. Many of the bacteria cultured from
subsurface environments are similar to well studied
bacteria in soil and surface water (Madsen and
Ghiorse 1993). Moreover, conditions that encourage
or inhibit bacterial growth are likely to exert similar
effects in any environment. However, subsurface conditions
differ in important ways from surface waters
and soils. Microorganisms in surface habitats interact
Hydrogeology Journal (2000) 8 : 63±76  Springer-Verlag
65
with a variety of plants, animals, and microfauna that
are not generally present in the subsurface. In further
contrast to surface environments, subsurface environments
have a relative paucity of carbon sources, and
the carbon sources that exist naturally have been
poorly characterized (Madsen and Ghiorse 1993; Lovley
and Chapelle 1995; Amy and Haldeman 1997;
Fredrickson and Fletcher 1999). Subsurface environments
also undergo fewer and less dramatic temporal
variations in, e.g., temperature and carbon supply,
than do surface environments. Finally, geochemical
conditions in the subsurface are strongly affected by
site geology and local groundwater flow regimes. All
of these subsurface environmental factors have important
effects on contaminant-plume processes.
Three types of approaches are currently employed
to study subsurface microbial populations at contaminated
sites: traditional culture-based methods, molecular-based
methods, and laboratory microcosms.
Culture-based approaches are useful for determining
the abundance of some physiologic types of organisms
in a contaminated environment. Molecular methods
may reflect more closely in situ populations, because
culture-based results reflect only those organisms that
grow on laboratory media (Madsen 1998). Molecular
methods include phospholipid fatty acid (PLFA) analyses,
which are reviewed by Green and Scow (2000)
and nucleic-acid analyses, reviewed by Madsen (2000),
both in this issue. PLFA analyses are useful for quantifying
active biomass and characterizing community
changes over time and space. Nucleic-acid methods
can provide information on the identities of the bacteria
present and on their catabolic functions. Laboratory
microcosm studies using site-derived samples
are often used to estimate degradation rates and to
enrich specific bacterial populations for further study.
Laboratory microcosms can provide important information
about microbial processes at a site, if they are
carefully monitored to replicate in situ conditions.
Application of all of these methods at contaminated
sites has provided new and intriguing information on
the diversity and function of microbial populations
and communities.
All studies of microorganisms in the environment
suffer from the fact that fewer than 10% (and possibly
fewer than 1%) of the extant bacteria (Pace 1996;
Madsen 2000) have been characterized. In a study by
Dojka et al. (1998) using DNA-based approaches at a
site contaminated by jet fuel and chlorinated solvents,
almost a third of the bacteria for which DNA
sequences were obtained can be distinguished only by
their DNA sequence and belong to groups for which
no cultured representative exists. Thus, numerically
dominant and as of yet uncultured and therefore
unknown populations of microbes exist at this contaminated
site, and their role in this contaminated aquifer
is certainly unknown. Likewise, when specific genes
are not detected in environmental samples, as in several
of the studies reviewed below, other unknown
genes, possibly coding for similar functions, are likely
to be present. The vast majority of catabolic gene
sequences that are currently documented encode
enzymes common in aerobic bacteria. In contrast,
many, if not most, sites contaminated with bacterially
degradable organic compounds are anaerobic, as a
result of bacterial utilization of oxygen in the presence
of the contaminants. Low biomass in subsurface materials
presents a continuing challenge for all molecular
methods and may bias results from methods in which
nucleic-acid sequences are amplified (Tanner et al.
1998).
Evidence indicates that communities of organisms
usually work in concert to degrade the organic contaminants
at a site. Microbial communities are
believed to be similar to communities of plants or
animals, in that they are structured largely by interactions
among populations and between populations
and the abiotic environment. Commonly measured
community features, such as the numbers and types of
different categories of organisms, or the relative magnitude
or rate of a process, such as degradative capacity,
are a function of these interactions. However,
unlike plants and animals, bacteria are distinguished
from each other primarily by their unique metabolic
capabilities rather than their structure or appearance.
Therefore, understanding bacterial-community composition
in terms of the different physiologic groups
represented becomes particularly important for understanding
biodegradation processes.
Slater and Lovatt (1984) present a classification of
seven types of microbial-community interactions in
the degradation of organic compounds. Several of
their interaction types have been observed in contaminant
plumes and are described below. In some cases,
these are assemblages in which each member degrades
one or more compounds, but each organism can function
independently of the others. In other cases, a consortium
of bacteria develops, which is defined as a
more closely coupled interaction where one member
requires the activity of another for substrate metabolism
to occur at all. Examples include cases of ªcombined
metabolic attack,º where each bacterial partner
provides an enzyme required to break down a substrate,
and ªinterspecies product transfer,º where one
bacterial partner uses a by-product of the first, resulting
in a thermodynamic shift that allows degradation
of an otherwise recalcitrant substrate. Other interactions
described by Slater and Lovatt (1984) are
based on cases where one bacterial partner provides
specific nutrients, removes inhibitory substances, or
modifies growth parameters such as pH for the second,
which actually carries out the substrate degradation.
The effect of consortium development is that
consortia are capable, in concert, of carrying out a
metabolic reaction that none of the consortium
members could carry out on its own. Slater and Lovatt
(1984) conclude that the key to understanding the fate
of organic contaminants in the environment is in
Hydrogeology Journal (2000) 8 : 63±76  Springer-Verlag
66
understanding community interactions rather than the
specific capabilities of individual bacteria.
Bacteria are also distinguished by their ability to
exchange genetic material between taxonomic groups
more readily than do other organisms (Reanny et al.
1983). Genes that encode enzymes that are needed to
degrade contaminants may be transferred from one
bacterium to another. In order to degrade some types
of contaminants, especially the new types of compounds
that humans have created in recent decades,
bacteria must acquire or develop new genes to create
enzymes with the appropriate functions. Evidence
exists for both gene transfer and gene development at
contaminated sites, as described below.
One outcome of these two unique aspects of microbial-community
structure might be that subsurface
microbial processes vary substantially from site to site,
based on unique combinations of genes or organisms
at those sites. Evidence presented below indicates that
some bacterial biodegradative populations may occur
at one plume but not at another. If so, substantially
more variability in biodegradative processes across
sites would occur than could be predicted from site
environmental characteristics alone, and identifying
and quantifying bacterial populations and their interactions
in contaminant plumes would be critical for
site assessment.
Adaptation of Microbial Communities Within Plumes
Increases in the numbers of contaminant-degrading
bacteria or increases in the rate of degradation of contaminants
inside the plume are regarded as one line of
evidence of natural bioremediation or the success of a
bioaugmentation strategy (National Research Council
1993). Numerous studies have documented increases
in the number of contaminant-degrading bacteria
inside groundwater contaminant plumes compared to
uncontaminated aquifer materials located nearby (reviewed
below). This situation is commonly referred to
as adaptation of the microbial populations or communities
to plume conditions. However, the processes
that lead to adaptation of bacteria within a plume are
not well understood. Three mechanisms for this process
have been proposed: (1) favored growth of a bacterium
present at the site prior to contamination; (2)
introduction of a contaminant-adapted bacterium from
outside the area; and (3) favored growth of a bacterium
carrying a unique metabolic pathway that arose
in situ by genetic transfer or recombination (van der
Meer et al. 1998). Recent use of DNA-based methods
has provided some insights into the mechanisms of
adaptation. In many cases, a mixed community of
microorganisms develops whose combined activities
result in effective degradation of the contaminants.
Numbers and Activity of Contaminant Degraders
Many studies have documented increases in microbial
numbers in contaminant plumes. At an abandoned
refinery near Hünxe, Germany, Zarda et al. (1998)
observed greater bacterial and protozoan numbers in
aquifer materials highly contaminated with monoaromatic
hydrocarbons in contrast to less-contaminated
materials. Godsy et al. (1992) report a 100-fold
increase in culturable methanogens within the groundwater
plume compared to the uncontaminated groundwater
at a creosote waste site near Pensacola, Florida,
USA, where methanogenic degradation of creosote
contaminants is occurring. Pfiffner et al. (1997)
describe the groundwater chemistry and the abundances
of physiologic groups of bacteria, using culturebased
and PLFA approaches, in four locations at a
benzene, toluene, ethylbenzene, and xylene (BTEX)
-contaminated site near Detroit, Michigan, USA. At
this site, highly contaminated sediments had two to
four times the bacterial biomass (determined from
PLFA) of less-contaminated aquifer materials.
Groundwater geochemistry indicates anaerobic conditions
in the most contaminated portions of the
plume; however, Pfiffner et al. (1997) enumerate only
aerobic hydrocarbon-degrading populations. Aerobic
hydrocarbon degraders were most numerous in the
more aerobic portions of the plume and were not correlated
with hydrocarbon concentrations on the sediments.
Other studies document increases in specific contaminant
degraders, but non-specific measures of total
microbial populations sometimes did not show an
increase. Song and Bartha (1990) note an increase in
microbial numbers in general, and a specific increase
in hydrocarbon degraders in surface and subsurface
materials contaminated with jet fuel. Long et al.
(1995) compare numbers of toluene- and decane-degrading
bacteria in pristine, uncontaminated materials
with aquifer materials contaminated with jet fuel or
gasoline. They report that the proportion of decanedegrading
bacteria was higher in all contaminated
samples, and that toluene-degrader numbers were at
least an order of magnitude greater in contaminated
samples compared to pristine samples. Braddock and
McCarthy (1996) investigated a hydrocarbon-contaminated
site in the Arctic Ocean where the saturated
zone thaws for about 90 days each summer. At this
site, the numbers of hydrocarbon-oxidizing microorganisms
were 100 times greater in samples from contaminated
areas than in uncontaminated samples. In
contrast to the study of Song and Bartha (1990), however,
populations of total heterotrophs at the site (indicative
of a general increase in bacterial populations)
do not correlate with contaminant levels.
Some studies show an increase in specific degradative
activity within contaminant plumes. At a coal-tar
waste site, naphthalene and phenanthrene leaching
from disposed coal tar to groundwater were degraded
in samples taken from within the plume, but not in
Hydrogeology Journal (2000) 8 : 63±76  Springer-Verlag
67
uncontaminated samples (Madsen et al. 1991). In addition,
increases in numbers of bacteria and protozoa
occurred within the plume. Later studies at the same
site (Madsen et al. 1996; Wilson and Madsen 1996)
extracted a metabolite of bacterial naphthalene degradation.
The presence of the metabolite and the comigration
of degradative bacteria with coal-tar-derived
aromatic hydrocarbons reflect in situ degradative
processes occurring within the plume. Long-term studies
of chlorobenzene-degrading bacteria at Kelly Air
Force Base in Texas, USA, show that chlorobenzene
degraders occur only within the chlorobenzene-contaminated
area (van der Meer et al. 1998). Stapleton
et al. (1998a) use the abundance of the 16S rDNA
gene ± see Madsen (2000) for description of the use of
this gene ± as an indicator of bacterial biomass for a
site contaminated with BTEX, and naphthalene at
Columbus Air Force Base, Mississippi, USA. Little
change in microbial biomass occurred within the
plume compared to the uncontaminated background.
Activity assays, however, indicate that microorganisms
in materials from within the plume are more active
than those in materials taken from outside the plume
in degrading benzene, toluene, and naphthalene.
In summary, observed increases in biomass, specific
contaminant degraders, and degradative activity indicate
that subsurface microbial populations adapt to
contaminant plumes. It is unclear, however, why at
some sites specific assays for degradative microbial
populations indicate an increase within the contaminant
plume, whereas more general assays (e.g., for
bacterial biomass) do not. Possible explanations
include (1) changes in activity of already-existing populations
without a concomitant increase in their
numbers, (2) within-plume variability in populations
and subsurface conditions, and (3) artifacts due to the
method used. Combined site studies employing interactions
between hydrogeologists and microbiologists
are most likely to resolve these issues.
Degradative Genes
The nucleic-acid sequences of genes that encode
enzymes responsible for critical or unique steps in the
degradation of contaminants can be detected in environmental
samples (see Madsen 2000). The sequences
of some degradative genes have been identified
through laboratory studies of selected bacteria known
to degrade particular contaminants. Most of the degradative
genes identified to date are associated with bacteria
that are relatively easy to grow in the laboratory
and that degrade common contaminants, such as
toluene, naphthalene, and trichloroethylene (TCE).
Observations of increases in these characterized
degradative genes in contaminant plumes indicate that
microbial populations are adapting to exploit the
influx of contaminants at a site. Recent results also
provide some insights into the mechanism of genetic
adaptation.
Hallier-Soulier et al. (1996) examined 12 types of
subsurface materials contaminated with fuels or hydrocarbons
for the presence of the xylE (catechol 2,
3,-dioxygenase) gene, indicative of aromatic hydrocarbon
degradation. The xylE gene was detected in
greater abundance in contaminated than in pristine
materials, but the abundance of this gene was poorly
correlated with the number of toluene-degrading bacteria
present. This result might indicate that toluenedegrading
bacteria with other untested or unknown
degradation pathways were also present. Guo et al.
(1997) report that of five tested degradative genes, the
presence of the xylE gene is best correlated with fueloil
contamination at a leaking underground storage
site in Washington state, USA. They also detected
genes for naphthalene degradation (nahAcd) and
toluene para-monoxygenase (tmoABCDE) at lesser
levels, but they did not detect genes for alkane
hydroxylase (alkB) or toluene dioxygenase
(todC1C2BA).
Stapleton and Sayler (1998) report on the presence
of several genes involved in various contaminant degradation
pathways at three sites in the USA. These
sites are (1) the US Department of Energy Westinghouse
Savannah River site in Aiken, South Carolina,
contaminated with the chlorinated solvents PCE (tetrachloroethylene)
and TCE; (2) Dover Air Force
Base, Delaware, at locations contaminated with
BTEX, PCE, and TCE; and (3) Columbus Air Force
Base, Mississippi, at locations contaminated with
BTEX and naphthalene (Stapleton and Sayler 1998).
At Savannah River, each gene was present in the population
prior to field remedial treatment, and several
remedial treatments appeared to decrease some gene
frequencies, but results are inconclusive due to low
bacterial biomass. Nevertheless, these authors successfully
used DNA-detection methods at the other two
sites. At Dover Air Force Base, six genes involved in
degradation of methane, toluene, naphthalene, and
TCE were not detected in uncontaminated materials,
but each gene was detected in contaminated areas
undergoing natural attenuation. At Columbus Air
Force Base, genes for alkane hydrolysis, anaerobic
TCE degradation, and aerobic degradation of naphthalene,
toluene, and xylene were quantified in an
artificially generated plume of benzene, toluene, ethylbenzene,
p-xylene, and naphthalene undergoing natural
attenuation (Stapleton and Sayler 1998). In
contrast to the Dover site, each of the degradative
genes was also detected in uncontaminated aquifer
materials from Columbus Air Force Base. Within the
plume, little change in microbial biomass occurred,
and the quantity of each gene was similar to that at
uncontaminated locations.
Results from the above studies highlight the limitations
of current knowledge on degradative genes controlling
contaminant biodegradation. At this time, the
number of known genes available for analysis is small.
Thus, the specific genes for which molecular
Hydrogeology Journal (2000) 8 : 63±76  Springer-Verlag
68
approaches are currently available may be present in
only part of the degrading population, as in the study
by Hallier-Soulier et al. (1996). Presumably, at sites
where the use of probes for known degradative genes
was unsuccessful, unknown genes exist that contribute
to the degradation processes. This may especially
apply where the gene probes used are not well
matched with site conditions, e.g., where gene probes
for aerobic degradation pathways are used to study a
site under primarily anaerobic conditions.
Some studies have used gene-based approaches to
understand how degradative capabilities are acquired
by microbial populations in contaminant plumes.
These studies demonstrate that bacteria can either
share degradative genes or develop new degradative
genes within a specific site. Herrick et al. (1993)
analyzed samples for naphthalene degradation using a
degradative gene sequence similar to that used by
Guo et al. (1997). They analyzed materials from
uncontaminated and contaminated locations at a coaltar
waste site and observed the gene at two of four
locations within the plume, although naphthalene mineralization
was noted at all four locations. They did
not detect the gene at an upgradient, uncontaminated
site. At the same site, Herrick et al. (1997) report that
seven plume-derived bacteria had the same sequence
for the naphthalene degradation gene, even though
these bacteria belonged to different species. From this
evidence, they conclude that the naphthalene degradation
gene was transferred recently between bacteria at
their study site.
Evidence exists that in some cases degradative
genes may originate at a site. Van der Meer et al.
(1998) studied the origin of chlorobenzene-degrading
bacteria at Kelly Air Force Base, Texas. They conclude
that the ability to degrade chlorobenzene, which
is rare in aerobic bacteria, was not present initially at
the contaminated site but occurs now in a distinctive,
site-specific population of aerobic bacteria that have
apparently acquired the ability through gene transfer
and rearrangement. Chlorobenzene degraders could
not be obtained at Kelly Air Force Base from outside
the chlorobenzene-contaminated area, suggesting that
degrading populations did not exist prior to the introduction
of the contaminant. Chlorobenzene-degrading
bacteria within the plume at Kelly Air Force Base do
not carry the same gene sequences as do other chlorobenzene-degrading
bacteria from other sites, suggesting
that the gene for chlorobenzene degradation did
not arrive with newly introduced bacteria. Instead,
some of the genes in the predominant chlorobenzene
degrading bacterium at the site are similar to those in
other, non-chlorobenzene degraders from the site.
This finding suggests that a new chlorobenzene-degradative
gene was formed from non-degradative genes
in bacteria indigenous to Kelly Air Force Base.
In summary, the usefulness of DNA-based methods
is currently limited by the number of known degradative
genes. Molecular methods, however, are capable
of elucidating the mechanisms by which bacteria at a
site acquire degradative capabilities. Further studies
identifying new genes and on the capabilities of bacteria
to transfer or create genes are needed to fully
understand gene abundances and site biodegradative
capacities.
Community Structure
Contaminant degradation at a site may not be the
result of the activity of a single population of bacteria.
Instead, communities composed of multiple bacterial
populations, with different degradative capabilities,
probably contribute to the overall rate and capacity
for degradation measured at a site. Understanding the
degree to which degradation is a group as opposed to
individual function is important to understanding the
potential success of remediation strategies. A particularly
interesting example is the degradation of TCE at
Moffett Field, California, USA. TCE is a contaminant
that cannot be used as an aerobic growth substrate by
any known bacteria. Nonetheless, some bacteria
produce enzymes that oxidize TCE when they grow
on other substrates. This fortuitous reaction is called
co-metabolism, or specifically, co-oxidation. Fries et
al. (1997) studied populations of phenol- and toluenedegrading
bacteria that can co-oxidize TCE following
growth on these two primary substrates. They conclude
that TCE degradation at Moffett Field, California,
is the result of the combined activities of multiple
bacterial populations, none of which degraded TCE
particularly well. If this is the case, addition of toluene
or phenol to stimulate TCE degradation would not
necessarily produce the anticipated result. Instead, the
addition of phenol or toluene that encouraged the
growth of a bacterial population that co-oxidized TCE
poorly would result in less TCE degradation than
observed with the combined activities of many populations.
Fries et al. (1997) also obtained information about
the abundance of common TCE-degradative genes in
these same bacteria. They characterized 273 individual
phenol- and toluene-degrading bacteria following field
tests of phenol- or toluene-mediated TCE degradation
at Moffett Field. The population of phenol and
toluene degraders was very abundant and heterogeneous
in type and level of activity. Only one of five
known toluene degradative pathways (toluene orthomonoxygenase,
or TOM) was detected by genetic
analysis in these 273 bacteria, and 86% of the bacteria
that grew on both phenol and toluene carried this
gene. Although the TOM pathway of toluene degradation
has been implicated in the laboratory as one of
the more favorable pathways for TCE co-oxidation,
these isolates varied greatly in their ability to co-oxidize
TCE, and at best they were moderately effective
in comparison to laboratory strains. This result
emphasizes the difficulty of relating laboratory results
to field conditions. Likewise, Gram-positive bacteria,
Hydrogeology Journal (2000) 8 : 63±76  Springer-Verlag
69
which make up about 30% of the 273 bacteria, did not
carry any of the known toluene-degradation genes,
although they could grow on either toluene or phenol.
Therefore, they must possess other, uncharacterized,
degradative genes.
Similarly, Ridgway et al. (1990) studied 297 individual
gasoline-degrading bacteria from a site contaminated
with unleaded gasoline. Most could grow on 2
or 3 of 15 tested gasoline components, and about 75%
could grow on toluene. Highly related bacteria (e.g.,
strains of the same species) often differed in their ability
to grow on various gasoline components. These
studies indicate that many degradative bacterial populations,
varying greatly in their degradative capabilities,
may exist at a single site. Understanding how
they interact may be important in designing remedial
strategies for a site. In particular, the role of competition
between microorganisms for resources in contaminant
plumes remains virtually unexplored.
Community interactions are also important for
understanding the adaptation of populations that use
different electron acceptors within contaminant
plumes. A particularly well studied microbial consortium
requires the coexistence of methanogens and
bacteria in the genera Syntrophus to perform methanogenic
degradation of various contaminants (Ferry
and Wolfe 1977; Schink 1997). Using benzoate as a
model organic substrate, methanogenic degradation
has been shown to be thermodynamically favorable
only if methanogens are present to remove H2 or formate
(e.g., Ferry and Wolfe 1977). Thus, a consortium
of Syntrophus sp. and methanogens together can effect
the degradation of benzoate by methanogenesis,
although results of laboratory studies indicate that
neither organism could carry out this degradative
process on its own (Schocke and Schink 1997). Dojka
et al. (1998) document coexistence of bacteria similar
to the genera Syntrophus and Methanosaeta in regions
of a fuel- and solvent-contaminated aquifer where
methane concentrations were typically high. Consortia
may be required for other biodegradation reactions,
but studies in which no single organism can grow independently
on the tested substrate involve unique laboratory
challenges. Therefore, the role of microbial
consortia in biodegradation reactions is poorly understood.
Communities of Bacteria and Protozoa
Protozoa sometimes occur in contaminant plumes, and
recent studies indicate that the bacterial and protozoan
populations are correlated. Madsen et al. (1991)
note an increase in both bacteria and protozoa in a
plume of coal-tar wastes. In contrast, Ludvigsen et al.
(1999) observed no protozoa in any samples collected
from an anaerobic leachate plume. Zarda et al. (1998)
note increases in both bacterial and protozoan
numbers in highly contaminated aquifer materials at a
hydrocarbon-contaminated site. These investigators
used both molecular and culture-based approaches to
determine protozoan abundance. As is typically the
case for bacteria, more protozoa were detected using
the molecular approaches than were detected by culture.
Nanoflagellates were the dominant component of
the protozoan community. The ratio of protozoa to
bacteria remained constant at around 1 : 103 in this
aquifer, suggesting that the protozoan and bacterial
populations are closely linked.
Evidence suggests that protozoa are significant in
controlling bacterial abundance. Sinclair et al. (1993)
observed increases in protozoan numbers in the unsaturated
zone and in saturated regions below floating
fuel at a site contaminated with aviation gasoline and
jet fuel. They relate protozoan abundance primarily to
availability of oxygen, and note that protozoa
increased along with bacteria in an area undergoing
biotreatment with H2O2. Despite the increase in bacteria
following biotreatment, hydraulic conductivity in
the aquifer did not decrease significantly, suggesting
that the bacterial clogging of the aquifer pore spaces
was reduced by protozoan predation. Similarly, results
from modeling of a TCE-contaminated site indicate
that predation of bacteria by protozoa might account
for population fluctuations in methanotrophs (Travis
and Rosenberg 1997).
Protozoa may also be significant in controlling bacterial
size by selective predation. A diverse protistan
community was observed within groundwater contaminated
by a plume of sewage effluent near Cape Cod,
Massachusetts, USA (Novarino et al. 1997) that
included some species that had been hitherto undescribed
(Novarino et al. 1994). Many protozoa (up to
105
/g) have been observed in both the oxic and suboxic
zones of the contaminant plume (Kinner et al.
1997). Results from laboratory studies suggest that the
protistan community at Cape Cod may completely
consume numbers equivalent to the unattached population
of bacteria immediately downgradient from the
contaminant source every few days (Kinner et al.
1998). The community of protozoa at Cape Cod is
dominated by 2±3 mm nanoflagellates that feed selectively
on a class of unattached bacteria that are
0.8±1.5 mm in size (Kinner et al. 1998) and that constitute
much of the pore-water biomass within the plume
(Harvey and Garabedian 1991).
In summary, relatively few studies have been conducted
on the role of protozoa in contaminant plumes.
The results of one study indicate that protozoa do not
always occur under anaerobic conditions. Other studies
indicate, however, that protozoa may be significant
under both aerobic and anaerobic conditions in controlling
bacterial abundance. There is evidence that
selective predation on bacteria in a specific size range
may play a role in structuring bacterial communities.
Presumably, the role of protozoa in recycling nutrients
required for bacterial growth may also be important
and needs to be explored.
Hydrogeology Journal (2000) 8 : 63±76  Springer-Verlag
70
Influence of Subsurface Conditions
Efforts to delineate site variability that may affect
microbial populations or their activities are limited by
the ability of investigators to define the hydrogeological
environment of contaminant plumes at microbiologically
relevant scales. For example, the vast
majority of aqueous-chemistry data from contaminated
sites is collected from wells for which the open
interval spans more than a meter. In contrast, many of
the studies reviewed herein demonstrate that changes
in site geology, hydrology, and geochemistry relevant
to microorganisms can occur on much smaller scales.
Studies of subsurface contaminant plumes show that
rates of microbial processes determined in situ are
sometimes not well replicated by laboratory studies
using site-representative materials (Chapelle et al.
1996; Smith et al. 1996). Due to the difficulty of defining
site characteristics accurately at microbiologically
relevant dimensions, laboratory tests may often fail to
reproduce the in situ characteristics significant to the
microbial populations carrying out the process of
interest.
Several of the studies described above report the
inability to detect bacteria or their genes in all the
expected locations at a site (e.g., Herrick et al. 1993;
Stapleton et al. 1998a). Loeffler et al. (1998) describe
variability in the type and extent of degradation of
TCE in samples taken from two depths in a shallow,
sandy aquifer in Michigan, USA. Nielsen and Christensen
(1994) note that aerobic degradation rates of
aromatic hydrocarbons varied with location in a
hydrocarbon plume. Kao and Borden (1997) describe
site-specific variability in BTEX degradation under
nitrate-reducing conditions across a survey of four
sites in two states. At a site contaminated with jet fuel
and solvents, Dojka et al. (1998) document that zones
geochemically defined as iron-reducing or sulfate-reducing
did not harbor significant populations of currently
known iron- or sulfate-reducing bacteria.
Anderson and Lovley (1999) note the occurrence of
spatial variability in naphthalene and benzene biodegradation
at a petroleum-contaminated site in Bemidji,
Minnesota, USA.
These results suggest that a better understanding is
required of the hydrologic and geochemical conditions
controlling microbial habitats in the subsurface.
Recent studies document systematic variations over
time and space in microbial populations in contaminant
plumes. Using interdisciplinary approaches, the
population variations have been related to changes in
subsurface geochemical and hydrologic conditions.
Thus, encouraging evidence is emerging that known
principles of microbial adaptation to surface habitats
can be applied to the subsurface once the hydrologic
and geologic controls on geochemical conditions and
nutrient supply are better understood. Figure 1 illustrates
some currently understood factors that influence
subsurface habitats in contaminant plumes. The
importance of each depicted influence is documented
in various studies that are summarized below.
Hydrology and Geology
Understanding site hydrology is critical to evaluation
of contaminant-plume development. Nevertheless,
very few studies document the effect of hydrologic
parameters on microbial populations in contaminant
plumes. Several studies have examined the development
of terminal-electron-accepting-process
(TEAP) zones, where variations in microbial physiological
processes occur along groundwater flow paths
and with depth in contaminant plumes (Chapelle 1993;
Chapelle et al. 1995; Smith 1997). Characterization of
physiological processes is important because the degradation
potential of specific compounds varies
depending on the TEAP. Typically, TEAP zones are
delineated by measuring, for example, concentrations
of electron donors and acceptors in pore-water samples
from wells. However, interpretation of these data
is problematic, because concentrations of these constituents
are affected not only by microbial reactions
but also by advective transport, dispersion, and inorganic
reactions. In addition, because geochemical gradients
exist in plumes on vertical scales of less than
1 m, pore-water samples from wells with large screen
lengths, which are typical at many contaminated sites,
may be sampling waters from two or more TEAP
zones. By sampling aquifers at small spatial scales,
several studies illuminate the underlying processes
Figure 1 Conceptual illustration of how subsurface environmental
conditions influence microbial populations in contaminant
plumes. Near contaminant source, some members of the microbial
community may be inhibited by toxic concentrations of the
contaminant, thereby leading to decreased growth and buildup
of intermediate compounds. In vicinity of capillary fringe and
water table, an influx of nutrients and electron acceptors with
groundwater recharge may result in greater growth. Redox conditions
in this area may vary with seasonal water-table fluctuations.
Below water table, contaminant plume and associated
redox zones follow curves of groundwater flow lines. Redox conditions
often vary among zones of high and low permeability
Hydrogeology Journal (2000) 8 : 63±76  Springer-Verlag
71
controlling the zonation of microbial physiologic types
that correspond to various TEAPs.
Significant vertical and horizontal variations in
TEAP zonation and associated degradation processes
have been noted in a variety of settings (Christensen
et al. 1994; Norris et al. 1994). Smith et al. (1991a)
document the requirement for closely spaced vertical
sampling intervals to delineate microbiological TEAP
and degradative gradients at contaminated sites. At
the Borden aquifer in Canada, Rajaram and Gelhar
(1991) examined vertical dispersivity in the field, and
they report values that are on the order of molecular
diffusion. Similarly, at a sewage-effluent plume near
Cape Cod, Massachusetts, studies with large-scale
tracer tests estimate the vertical dispersivity in the
aquifer to be 0.15 cm, or >600 times smaller than longitudinal
dispersivity (Garabedian et al. 1991; LeBlanc
et al. 1991). The small vertical dispersivity at the Cape
Cod site limits vertical mixing and maintains sharp
gradients in oxygen and other solutes, even after several
kilometers and several decades of transport
(Smith et al. 1991a). Concomitant with the oxygen
gradients are large changes over a vertical distance of
a few meters in bacterial abundance, growth rates,
and heterotrophic activity, as well as cell morphology
(Smith et al. 1991b). In the horizontal direction, the
plume character at Cape Cod changes more gradually
downgradient over a scale of kilometers. An increasing
recalcitrance of the residual dissolved organic carbon
(DOC) occurs (Harvey and Barber 1992), and
some studies report an increasing importance of autotrophic
processes (such as nitrification) as an oxygenconsuming
mechanism (Ceazan 1987; Ceazan et al.
1988).
At a crude-oil spill site near Bemidji, Minnesota,
Essaid et al. (1995) note variations in hydrologic flow
paths in response to restricted recharge through the
non-aqueous oil body. Variations in flow paths
resulted in dramatic changes in the overall depth of
the anaerobic portion of the plume, where ferric iron
reduction and methanogenesis were the dominant
TEAPs. At the same site, Bekins et al. (1999) show
that areas where methanogenic conditions had developed
are clearly indicated by shifts in the numbers
and types of culturable organisms attached to the
materials. In the methanogenic intervals, these workers
report increased numbers of methanogens and heterotrophic
fermenters and fewer iron reducers. Even
though methane concentrations were near saturation
throughout the anoxic zone, which is 2±4 m in vertical
thickness (Cozzarelli et al. 1996), culturable methanogens
exist in narrow intervals spanning only
25±50% of this zone.
Ludvigsen et al. (1998, 1999) studied microbial populations
and redox processes in 37 samples taken from
an aquifer contaminated by landfill-leachate near
Grindsted, Denmark. As in other studies, this research
demonstrates that landfill leachate modifies aquifer
conditions to support enhanced growth of specific
populations of bacteria and fungi. Numbers of all bacteria
(by direct count) and biomass (by PLFA) were
highest in the most contaminated portion of the aquifer,
near the landfill margin. In this same area, methane
production and sulfate reduction were observed,
and numbers of methanogens and sulfate reducers
(determined by most probable number, MPN) were
greatest. Downgradient of the landfill margins, sulfate
reducers could still be detected, as well as iron, manganese,
and nitrate reducers. PLFA profiles also indicate
that a shift in community composition occurred
along the downgradient transect, and some specific
PLFAs support the interpretation of increased abundance
of sulfate reducers near the landfill border.
However, no clear relationship was observed between
PLFA biomarkers for specific redox-related populations
and quantitative measures of redox processes in
the same samples. Most samples exhibited more than
one co-occurring redox activity, although usually one
process dominated. This work substantiates the need
to understand the structure of both communities and
populations in contaminant plumes in order to interpret
degradation processes.
Fluctuations in recharge to shallow contaminant
plumes can create temporal variability in geochemical
conditions that is reflected in microbial population
changes. Vroblesky and Chapelle (1994) describe
changes in site TEAP zonation in response to the
influx of sulfate with recharge. McGuire et al. (1999)
document significant temporal variation, on the scale
of months, in TEAP zonation in a groundwater plume
containing fuel and chlorinated solvents near Oscoda,
Michigan, USA. Concomitant changes were noted in
results of DNA-based analyses of microbial-community
structure at this site over similar temporal
intervals (Haack and Reynolds 1999). At the same
site, methanogen populations were studied using RNA
extracted from active bacteria in the aquifer materials
(Reynolds and Haack 1999). Results suggest that populations
of methanogens (or other Archaea) were
most abundant in materials where the data indicate
that methanogenesis or sulfate reduction is the predominant
TEAP during most of the year. Dramatic
changes in methanogen (or other Archaea) abundance
occurred over vertical intervals of less than 1 m on
each tested date.
An understanding of site geology, hydrology, and
hydrochemistry is required to avoid misinterpreting
TEAP zonation. Yager et al. (1997) carefully delineate
the hydrogeologic setting of a fractured dolomite
aquifer contaminated with chlorinated ethenes.
Although methane and sulfide analyses in some wells
suggest that methanogenesis or sulfate reduction is a
possible TEAP, the authors were able to discount
both degradative processes at the site, on the basis of
hydrogen-gas analysis and by recognizing that the
source of the methane and sulfide is from a deeper
and non-contaminated aquifer unit. Background
hydrochemistry also affects the availability of various
Hydrogeology Journal (2000) 8 : 63±76  Springer-Verlag
72
electron donors and acceptors. For example, sulfate
reduction may not be important in certain plumes
because sulfate is not available in site pore waters
(Baedecker et al. 1993; Bekins et al. 1999). Yager et
al. (1997) conclude that reductive dechlorination of
TCE is accelerated by addition of pulverized dolomite
from one major geologic unit at the site. These
authors hypothesize that electron donors in the dolomite
(possibly carbon-rich bitumen) are responsible
for this result.
When ferric iron minerals are present at a site, bacterially
catalyzed oxidation of aromatic hydrocarbons
may be coupled to ferric-iron reduction (Lovley et al.
1989). The presence and depletion of ferric iron may
also affect the development of other TEAP zones
within a contaminant plume. At the crude-oil contaminated
site near Bemidji, Minnesota, Baedecker et al.
(1993) report that degradation of the hydrocarbons by
iron reduction initially dominated. However, as ferric
iron was depleted (Tuccillo et al. 1999), narrow methanogenic
zones formed in areas of high contaminant
flux (Bekins et al. 1999). Degradation of benzene (Anderson
et al. 1998; Rooney-Varga et al. 1999) and
naphthalene (Anderson and Lovley 1999) occurred at
the Bemidji site by ferric-iron reduction only in locations
where ferric iron was not depleted, and such
sites tended to be in downgradient locations, away
from methanogenic zones. At these locations, the rate
of anaerobic benzene or naphthalene degradation is
related to the percentage of ferric iron in the aquifer
materials (Anderson and Lovley 1999). These active
locations have higher abundances of bacteria in the
Geobacteraceae family (a ferric iron-reducing group)
but do not contain overall abundances of ferric-ironreducing
bacteria that are different from those at
other site locations.
Albrechtsen et al. (1995) observe that sediment
samples taken from near a landfill had low concentrations
of ferric iron, whereas those collected at more
downgradient locations had higher concentrations.
Negligible ferric-iron reduction was observed in the
ferric-iron-depleted samples under in situ conditions,
although the same samples amended with ferric iron
and acetate carried out ferric-iron reduction. Likewise,
submeter-scale intervals of sulfate reduction at a gasoline-contaminated
site near Galloway, New Jersey,
USA, are attributed to local depletion of microbially
reducible solid iron-oxyhydroxides (Cozzarelli et al.
1999).
Variability in the physical structure of aquifer
materials influences bacterial transport (Harvey et al.
1993). Lawrence and Hendry (1996) review the role of
geologic, hydrologic, and solute variables on bacterial
transport through geologic media. Their review indicates
that variations in site hydrogeology may significantly
influence the location and structure of
subsurface microbial communities by differential
transport of bacteria. Aelion (1996) notes increased
contamination and decreased biodegradation of jet
fuel in clay-dominated samples relative to more permeable
materials, taken from closely spaced vertical
intervals at a single site. Ulrich et al. (1998), using
micro-scale radiography, note decreased sulfate-reducing
activity in clay layers of unconsolidated contaminated
materials, as compared to sand layers.
Ludvigsen et al. (1999) report that PFLA analyses
reveal increased populations and changes in community
structure in clay and silt lenses compared to
sands in an aquifer contaminated by a landfill-leachate
plume. These observations suggest that significant
small-scale heterogeneity in biodegradation may be
expected, simply due to heterogeneity in aquifer materials.
Temperature
Various bacterial genera are adapted to temperature
extremes (Brock and Madigan 1989). Therefore,
biodegradation might take place in especially cold or
hot environments. Indeed, biodegradation of contaminants
at low temperatures is documented (Atlas 1986;
Braddock and McCarthy 1996). Conversion of toluene
to carbon dioxide occurred at similar rates in materials
from Alaska incubated at 5 C and from South Carolina
incubated at 20 C (Bradley and Chapelle 1995).
No similar study has been conducted at a high-temperature
site, although various thermophilic bacteria
capable of carrying out fermentative metabolism, sulfate
reduction, or sulfide oxidation have been isolated
from moderately high-temperature oil-field production
waters (Stetter et al. 1993; L'Haridon et al. 1995).
pH
Acidic or alkaline conditions are relatively common in
both pristine (Hem 1989) and contaminated groundwater.
A pH of less than 6.5 exists at sites where degradation
of creosote (Godsy et al. 1992), crude oil
(Baedecker et al. 1993), or jet fuel (Chapelle et al.
1996) has occurred. Although a circumneutral pH is
commonly assumed to be the optimum for microbial
biodegradative activity (Norris et al. 1994), few studies
have been conducted on the effects of pH on intrinsic
biodegradation. Stapleton et al. (1998b) report that
naphthalene and toluene were degraded in effluents
from a long-term coal pile storage basin that exhibits
pH values as low as 2.0. They suggest that either the
microbial community possesses unique degradative
pathways not represented in commonly studied bacteria,
or a consortium of microorganisms is required to
carry out the degradation in this acidic environment.
They note that common catabolic genes associated
with the degradation of naphthalene and toluene in
bacteria that require neutral pH could not be detected
by DNA-based methods in samples. Instead, an undefined
consortium of several bacteria, a fungus, and a
yeast from the site did metabolize 27% of the supplied
naphthalene in 1 week in laboratory tests.
Hydrogeology Journal (2000) 8 : 63±76  Springer-Verlag
73
Nutrient Availability
Many common organic contaminants (aromatic and
chlorinated aliphatic hydrocarbons) are composed primarily
of carbon and hydrogen. Therefore, nitrogen
and phosphorus limitations are likely if the contaminant
can be used as a carbon source by indigenous
microbial populations (Ghiorse and Wilson 1988). At
the crude-oil spill site in Minnesota, Bekins et al.
(1999) observed that culturable methanogens are 100
times higher in the contaminated unsaturated zone
than in the plume below the water table. These results
suggest that access to nutrients entering with recharge
water is promoting microbial growth in the unsaturated
zone. This finding is consistent with results
from this site of Rogers et al. (1998), who observed
that phosphate-bearing minerals placed in contaminated
wells were dissolved and concluded that the
microbial population was phosphate-limited. Franzmann
et al. (1996), using PLFA profiles at a BTEXcontaminated
site in Perth, Australia, report that
levels of biomass increased with proximity to the root
zone, suggesting that plants are a source of nutrients
in the subsurface.
Nutrient amendment to enhance hydrocarbon degradation
in marine oil spills and contaminated soils is
relatively common; however, the difficulties of delivering
nutrients to the subsurface have prevented similar
tests for most groundwater plumes. Fuller et al. (1995)
demonstrate that the rate of TCE and toluene degradation
in vadose-zone materials from a gasoline-contaminated
site was limited by the availability of
mineral nutrients. In contrast, Smith and Duff (1988)
demonstrate that denitrification of nitrate, a primary
contaminant in a sewage-effluent plume at Cape Cod,
was electron-donor (carbon) limited in a zone 5±7 m
thick that extends for several kilometers downgradient
from the contaminant source. N and P were added to
a plume of TCE undergoing aerobic degradation by
methanotrophic bacteria at the Savannah River, South
Carolina, site; this addition, however, had little effect
on methanotroph numbers in the plume (Travis and
Rosenberg 1997). These few results are not enough to
suggest the general availability of nutrients in the subsurface,
nor their effect on degradative processes.
Contaminant Toxicity
Contaminants may exert toxic effects on some bacteria
or bacterial metabolic pathways. Many contaminant
plumes contain mixtures of known organic
contaminants together with other poorly characterized
organic compounds, and, in some cases, heavy metals
or other potentially toxic inorganic compounds. Exposure
to various combinations of these contaminants is
likely to have significant effects on microbial-population
structure from one plume to another, but these
effects remain poorly described. For example, toxic
effects on hydrocarbon degradation have been noted
for organosulfur compounds (Londry and Suflita
1998). In addition, landfill leachate toxicity is hypothesized
by Ludvigsen et al. (1999) to explain low concentrations
of PFLAs and reduced rates of
methanogenesis and sulfate reduction in the areas of
highest leachate concentrations. The toxic effect of
heavy metals on microbes is extensively documented
(e.g., Collins and Stozky 1989), and heavy metals are
known to decrease degradation rates of organic contaminants
(e.g., Kuo and Genthner 1996). A better
understanding, however, is needed of the in situ
effects of heavy metals on degradation of organic contaminants.
Hydrocarbons can also be toxic to bacteria (Sikkema
et al. 1995). Although Mormile and Suflita (1996) indicate
that no inhibition of methanogenesis occurred by
selected gasoline hydrocarbons, other studies document
significant hydrocarbon toxicity effects. Guo et al.
(1997) report that the detection of the xylE gene
increased with aromatic hydrocarbon concentrations on
materials of up to 100 mg/kg, but detection decreased
at higher concentrations, perhaps due to toxicity. Similarly,
decreased populations in response to increased
gasoline concentrations are noted by Long et al. (1995).
Fries et al. (1997) document sensitivity of toluene-degrading
bacterial isolates from contaminated plumes to
the concentration of toluene, and Song and Bartha
(1990) conclude that enzymatic activity is inhibited by
some jet-fuel components. Likewise, Warren et al.
(1999) note toxicity of crude oil to acetate-utilizing
methanogens. Within the crude-oil plume, acetate-utilizing
methanogens were detected only at locations distant
from the non-aqueous oil body. In laboratory
microcosms, gas production from added acetate was
inhibited by the presence of crude oil. Laboratory studies
of acetate-utilizing methanogens from a creosotewaste-contaminated
site indicate that they also are
inhibited by the soluble fraction of the creosote compounds
(Bekins et al. 1997).
Summary and Conclusions
Studies of contaminant plumes show that subsurface
microbial populations adapt to contaminant plumes in
several ways. At all studied sites, either the activity or
the number of specific degraders has increased. In
most cases, non-specific measures of microbial
numbers also indicate an increase. Studies of increases
in degradative genes within plumes using molecular
methods are beginning to yield insights into the mechanisms
of adaptation. Evidence exists that new contaminant-degrading
genes unique to a site may be
formed from previously existing non-degradative
genes. In other cases, evidence for transfer of a contaminant-degradation
gene between species has been
documented. The results of many studies, however,
are less conclusive. Two important difficulties may
explain some of the inconclusive results. First, the use
of molecular methods is limited to genes that either
Hydrogeology Journal (2000) 8 : 63±76  Springer-Verlag
74
are known or can be isolated from the environment.
However, ample evidence indicates that most degradative
genes, particularly those for anaerobic degradation,
are still unknown. Second, many studies indicate
strong spatial variability in physiologic type and
genetic capabilities. These results suggest that a better
understanding is needed of how spatial variation in
the subsurface environment results in microbial variability.
Evidence shows that degradation reactions are carried
out by interacting communities of microorganisms
with different capabilities working in concert. For
example, many types of bacteria capable of degrading
a single compound may be present at a site, but they
may differ in degradative genes used, degradation
rates, or growth characteristics. Moreover, highly
related bacteria may grow on different compounds of
a complex mixture of organics such as gasoline. Presumably,
this specialization reduces competition for
substrates in contaminant plumes. The necessity for
coordinated action of a consortium in methanogenic
degradation of organics has been well documented in
the laboratory, and recently known members of a
methanogenic consortium were observed in a fueland
solvent-contaminated aquifer. The role of protozoan
predation in structuring microbial populations is
important at some sites.
Numerous features of subsurface environments
exert significant influence on microbial community
structure and on the processes that these communities
carry out under pristine or contaminated conditions.
These features include pore-water chemistry, permeability,
grain size, mineralogy, recharge characteristics,
temperature, and susceptibility to seasonal variations
in factors such as temperature and recharge. Features
such as these might be used to categorize subsurface
environments, in much the same way that lakes,
streams, or soils can be grouped by physical and
chemical features that influence microbial activity.
This review highlights promising results on the
numbers, types, and activities of bacteria in contaminant
plumes. As more studies become available from
culture-based and molecular approaches, a synthesis
of very practical information for the remediation community
will evolve.
