A Comparison of Microbial Community Characteristics Among Petroleum-Contaminated and Uncontaminated Subsurface Soil Samples 
Microb Ecol (1995) 30:297-307

MICROBIAL
ECOLOGY
© 1995Springer-VerlagNewYorkInc.

A Comparison of Microbial Community Characteristics
A m o n g Petroleum-Contaminated and Uncontaminated
Subsurface Soil Samples
S.C. Long, ~ C.M. Aelion, 2 D.C. Dobbins, 3 EK. Pfaender 4
Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, 18 Marston Hall, Box 35025, University of
Massachusetts, Amherst, Massachusetts, 01003, USA
2 Department of Environmental Health Sciences and Marine Science Program, University of South
Carolina, Columbia, South Carolina 29208, USA
3 Biotrol, Inc., 10300 Valley View Road, Eden Prairie, Minnesota 55344, USA
4 Department of Environmental Science and Engineering, University of North Carolina, Chapel
Hill, North Carolina, USA
Received: 23 September 1994; Revised: 12 January 1995

Abstract.

Measurements of microbial community size, including total cell
counts and specific degrader enumerations, were conducted on subsurface soil
samples from both petroleum-contaminated and pristine aquifers. Samples were
collected from both uncontaminated and contaminated areas of the petroleumcontaminated sites. In pristine and uncontaminated samples, total cell counts
(acridine orange direct counts) were related to depth. The deeper samples
contained smaller total microbial populations. However, indices of microbial
activity varied considerably from sample to sample and probably reflect soil
and site heterogeneity. Exposure to petroleum contamination apparently altered
the microbial community structure. In samples exposed to low levels of contaminants as vapors and/or dissolved phases (ppb concentrations), and not free
product, the toluene-specific degrader populations were larger at greater depths,
and the numbers of amino acid-specific degraders were highly correlated to
the numbers of decane-specific degraders, indicating that petroleum-adapted
microbial communities were present in the contaminated samples. In highly
contaminated samples, total microbial population densities decreased with
increasing depth; however, microbial activity tended to increase with depth.
These results indicate that petroleum contaminants exert toxic effects on the
active microbial community at high exposures and enrich specific degraders
at ppb levels of dissolved contaminants.

Correspondence to: S.C. Long

298

S.C. Long et al.

Introduction

In recent years, groundwater contamination has become an issue of major concern.
Investigations conducted during the past decade have shown that groundwater
supplies are susceptible to both biological and chemical pollution. On a total mass
basis, petroleum hydrocarbons constitute a major portion of environmental pollution
[3], with several hundred thousand known petroleum contaminated sites in the
United States alone [19,35].
The results of early investigations by soil microbiologists demonstrated that the
number of bacteria detectable below the rhizosphere, with plating methods available
at the time, rapidly decreased with depth [39]. Not until the development of
new sampling and enumeration techniques was it recognized that the subsurface
contained sizable, active microbial communities [16, 24, 44]. Since then, research
into the metabolic capabilities of aquifer microbial communities has been prolific.
Aquifer microbial communities can degrade a broad range of naturally occurring
and xenobiotic compounds under a broad range of environmental conditions [20,
22, 24, 31, 32, 42, 44, 45]: Two reviews of the research on subsurface microbial
ecology were presented by Ghiorse and Wilson [18] and by Dobbins et al. [11].
The results of these studies and many others led to the understanding that indigenous, aquifer, microbial populations could biodegrade environmental pollution and
affect remediation of contaminated sites.
Although it has been demonstrated that microbial communities can affect chemical pollutants, the presence of chemical pollutants can also affect microbial community structure. The chemicals can alter the community structure through selection
of pollutant degraders or through acute toxicity to microorganisms. Readily biodegradable pollutants can increase population densities by promoting growth through
providing carbon and energy to microorganisms in otherwise oligotrophic environments. Changes in microbial populations in response to catastrophic oil spills and
other exposures to petroleum products in marine and freshwater environments have
been well documented [8, 9, 27, 38]. The work by Aelion et al. [2] demonstrated
that subsurface microbial communities from a pristine aquii:er exhibited significant
adaptation on exposure to chemical pollutants in microcosm studies. These changes
included increases in numbers of microbes, changes in enzyme kinetics, and other
physiological changes. Exposure to pollutants has been documented to affect soil
population densities even at levels as low as 1 txg/liter in soil pore water [26]. In
the field, sampling at a contaminated site is usually conducted after the spill or
leak has been detected and can occur several weeks to several decades after the
initial chemical release. Thus, comparisons of microbial community characteristics
in response to pollutant exposure are difficult to assess. In this report, we investigate
the differences in community size and activity among microbial communities from
contaminated and uncontaminated subsurface soils from different aquifer systems
using common enumeration techniques.
Materials and Methods
The aquifer soil samples were collected from the saturated zone from each of the study sites using
aseptic sampling methods similar to those described by Dunlap et al. [l 3] and later modified by Wilson
et al. [44]. Samples from one pristine and three petroleum-contaminated aquifers were collected. All

A Comparison of Microbial Community Characteristics

299

samples were collected in autoclaved mason jars, wrapped in aluminum foil, and placed on ice as
soon as possible. The samples were shipped on ice to the laboratory for analysis, where they were
flushed with nitrogen gas to preserve environmental redox potential, and stored at 5°C in the dark
until analyses could be conducted. Enumeration experiments were conducted as rapidly after sample
collection as possible. For enumeration subsampling, the surface layers of the sediment cores were
scraped away and discarded, so that the enumeration sample could be taken from the center of the core.
Samples designated pristine were collected from an aquifer free of human contaminant impacts
(personal communication, J.T. Wilson, 1987). Samples collected at the petroleum-contaminated sites
represent different levels of contaminant exposure. Uncontaminated samples were collected either
upgradient of the contaminant plume or downgradient from the advancing front of the contaminant
plume. Because of the complex nature of subsurface systems, historical exposure to environmental
pollutants could have been possible in the uncontaminated areas of the sites even though nondetectable
levels of petroleum contaminants were reported at the time of sampling [10, 21, 25, 28]. Thus, the
uncontaminated samples were considered as a separate category from the pristine samples. Samples
judged to have low levels of contaminant exposure included those exposed to migrating contaminant
vapors downgradient of the pollutant plume and those exposed to contaminants dissolved in the
groundwater at parts per billion levels (micrograms per liter) [10, 21, 25, 28]. Samples judged to have
high levels of contaminant exposure were exposed to free product or nonaqueous phase liquid (NAPL)
and contaminants dissolved in the groundwater in parts per million (milligrams per liter) [10, 21, 25,
28]. Of course, the level of exposure varied within the two exposure groups; however, these divisions
were meant to be more qualitative than quantitative.
Acridine Orange direct counts (AODC) were performed on all soil samples. The procedure used
was the modified Ghiorse and Balkwill [16] procedure used by Dobbins and Pfaender [12] and
Swindoll et al. [33]. This method yields a count of the total intact cells without differentiation for
viability. A soil slurry was prepared from each soil sample using particle-free water (autoclaved and
filtered three times through 0.2-lxm Nucleopore filters) to give approximately 1 g soil per 10 ml water.
Duplicate dry weight determinations were made. The duplicate samples were serially diluted (1:10)
with particle-free water and fixed with particle-free formalin (Fisher Scientific, Fairlawn, N.J.; final
concentration of 2%) into particle-free test tubes (autoclaved, rinsed three times with particle-free
water). AODC slides were prepared from each duplicate sample. The samples were stained with a
final concentration of 0.01% Acridine Orange (Fisher Scientific). The microbes on the slides were
counted using a Leitz Ortholux microscope equipped with a 50-watt AC mercury light source, under
1250× oil immersion. The microbes on each slide were counted until 20 fields or 100 cells, which
ever came first, had been counted. A particle-free water control was also counted. Final cell counts
were calculated on a soil dry weight basis.
Carbon 14 most probable number (MPN) enumerations are used to estimate the density of specific
degraders by scoring for ~4CO2 evolution from radiolabeled substrates using a dilution series. MPN
determinations rely on probability theory and are based on two principal assumptions. One is that the
organisms are distributed randomly throughout the sample in a manner that can be described by a
Poisson distribution. As a best approximation, relative homogeneity was accomplished by the continuous blending of the soil slurry while sampling. The second assumption is that each sample that contains
one or more of the appropriate organisms will exhibit a response (in this case, evolve CO,_).
The ~4C-MPN experiments were performed using the modifications by Dobbins et al. [10] of the
method of Somerville et al. [29]. Substrates tested were L-[~4C(U)] mixed amino acids (New England
Nuclear Corp., Boston, Mass.), n-[1-~4C] decane (Amersham Corp., Arlington Heights, Ill.), or [ringU-~4C] toluene (Pathfinder Laboratories, Inc., St. Louis, Mo.). A soil slurry of approximately 1 g soil
per 10 ml was serially diluted by approximately I0-fold at each step. The dilution factors were
estimated by taking triplicate dry weights of 1-ml aliquots of the most concentrated dilution. Two
sets of controls were prepared. One set contained only sterile dilution medium (distilled H20 or buffer);
the second set of controls consisted of vials at each dilution level with the addition of sodium azide
(Sigma Chemical Co., St. Louis, Mo.) to a final concentration of 0.5% (w/v). Sets of five replicates
were used. The MPN vials were then incubated inverted at 20°C for an appropriate amount of time:
48 h for amino acids, 7 days for decane, and 14 days for toluene. The concentration of all substrates
added was approximately 50 ng per vial.
The dilutions were scored positive or negative for respiration by comparison to control values. A

S.C. Long et al.

300

Table 1.

Sample designations and pollutant exposure °

Pristine samples

Uncontaminated

Low-level exposure

High-level exposure

Sample
ID

Sample
depth (ft)

Sample
ID

Sample
depth (ft)

Sample
ID

Sample
depth (ft)

Sample
ID

Sample
depth (ft)

LL-2
LL-4
LL-10

19
16.5
16.5

CL-1B
CL-1D
CL-14
SC-7

33
42.5
33
8

SC-5A1
SC-5A2
SC-6A
SC-6B
SC-11
SC-23
SC-26

4.5
20
12.5
12.5
11.5
30
17

CL-12B
CL-12D
PR-1
SC-24

33
42.5
7
21

~LL samples are from a pristine aquifer in Lula, Oklahoma.
CL samples are from a gasoline-contaminated aquifer in Jacksonville, North Carolina.
PR sample is from a jet-fuel-contaminated aquifer in Patuxent River, Maryland.
SC samples are from a jet-fuel-contaminated aquifer in Hanahan, South Carolina.

response of the mean plus three times the standard deviation of the control disintegrations per minute
(dpm) values were considered positive. The MPN values were calculated using a microcomputer
program similar to the one presented by Clarke and Owen [7]. The results of ~4C-MPN determinations
are reported as MPN per gram dry weight of soil.
MPN determinations rely on random distribution of the degraders throughout the sample. Soil
microbes tend to aggregate in microcolonies, and thus homogeneous dilutions series are difficult to
achieve. A number of the JgC-MPN analyses for decane and toluene degraders resulted in a series
that caused divergence of the computer program, and thus, an MPN could not be calculated using the
computer program. For these experiments, replicates scoring positive for decane or toluene mineralization were noted in at least one dilution level for all divergent analyses. MPNs of specific degraders
were estimated for these divergent sample results using Table 9221:IV from Standard Methods for
the Examination of Water and Wastewater [30]. When the combination of positives did not appear in
Table 9221 :IV, the Thomas equation was used to estimate the MPN of specific degraders as described
in Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater [30].
Correlation analyses were conducted to help identify the relationships between two or more variables
of microbial characterization, sample characteristics, and pollutant exposure. Mathematically, correlation analysis is almost identical to linear regression. Correlation analysis is used to test the interdependence of two variables with no distinction between dependent and independent variables. The least
squares method was used to determine the best-fitting straight line model when two variables were
considered. All replicate values were used in correlation analyses rather than mean values. Coefficients
of determination (r 2) were interpreted to indicate the strength of the linear relationship between the
two variables considered. The closer the r 2 value is to 1, the stronger the linear relationship. Slope
or intercept values for the correlations were not calculated. However, r 2 values are a measure of the
proportion of variance that is accounted for by the linear model. Although correlation analyses can
be used to test whether there is a relationship between variables, they cannot be used to determine
whether the relationship is causal or simply associative.

Results
All sediment samples examined were of fine sands and gravel textures. A summary
o f t h e s a m p l e d e s i g n a t i o n s a n d p o l l u t a n t e x p o s u r e c h a r a c t e r i s t i c s is p r e s e n t e d i n
T a b l e 1, a n d a s u m m a r y o f g r o u n d w a t e r g e o c h e m i c a l c h a r a c t e r i s t i c s is p r e s e n t e d

A Comparison of Microbial Community Characteristics

301

Table 2. Groundwatergeochemical analysis from monitoring wells near soil sample locations

Aquifer~
Pristine samples
LL
Uncontaminated
CL
SC
Contaminated
CL
SC
PR

Depth to
groundwater
(feet)

DO
(ppm)

PO~-P
(mg/1)

8.5

2.6

0.12

NA
4-8

NA
1.24

NA
0.52

NA
4-8

NA
<0.2
NA

4

NA
0.07-0.28
0.1-0.5

NO2/NO3-N
(mg/1)

NH4-N
(mg/l)

SO4
(mg/1)

0.8

<0.05

197

NA
0.04

NA
<0.01

NA
13.8

NA
0.26-0.61
1-2

NA
NA
0.25-3.05 0.02-15.4
0.1
<150

NA, data not available.
~See Table 1 for definition of sample identifications.

in Table 2. The aquifers examined were generally low in nutrient content, with
microaerophilic or anoxic redox conditions developing in areas of high petroleum
contamination. The results of aerobically incubated total heterotrophic plate counts
(data not presented) on soil samples indicated that organisms capable of aerobic
growth were present in all samples tested, even samples from anoxic zones.
The enumeration data used for analyses were compiled from separate studies of
different aquifers, pristine and petroleum contaminated. The data were chosen for
inclusion in this paper because common methodologies were used, as described
earlier. Therefore, certain enumeration values were not available for some samples.
In all cases, original replicate enumeration values were used for statistical analyses.
The enumeration values are summarized in Table 3. For all samples tested, total
AODCs ranged from 1.1 × 105 to 5.9 × 108 cells per gram soil dry weight. These
results indicated that a sizable microbial community was present in each sample
tested. The AODCs determined for the pristine and uncontaminated samples in
this study were approximately on the same order of magnitude as those reported
in studies of other uncontaminated aquifer samples, with approximately the same
amount of intersample variation [5, 16, 36, 44]. The variation in the AODC
populations enumerated from the contaminated samples exhibited a larger amount
of intersample variation, which is also observed in other studies of contaminated
aquifer samples [6, 18, 34, 43].
Mixed amino acids were chosen as a representative of naturally occurring, easily
metabolized compounds. Since amino acids are essential components of microbial
cells, the size of the amino acid degrader community in a soil sample should reflect
the relative size of the metabolically active microbial community [ 10]. The numbers
of amino acid-specific degraders varied from 8.6 × 101 to 2.5 × 105 degraders per
gram soil dry weight (Table 3). These results indicated that a metabolically active
microbial community was present in each of the soils tested. The smallest metabolically active community was measured in an uncontaminated sample from the CL
gasoline-contaminated site (see Table 1 for definition of sample designation).
Decane was chosen as a test pollutant to represent the midweight, aliphatic
compounds commonly present in petroleum products, and toluene was chosen as

302

S.C. Long et al.

xx

<

Z

<<<
zzz

X

~<x×x×××
P--'~-oOOOl~,.O

•~-..;r.,i,,d,,4c,,i

r,¢3

×~×
~

od

:Z
',,,O

©

Z

xx <

ZZZ<<<X

X XX X X X X

X X~X

-4cd
V

.,.o

r~

<<<
ZZZ

<

zX~X

XXXX~XX

~XXX
o
Q

Z

<<<
ZZZ

z X X X

X X X X X X X

A

X X X X

A

~d
~xx

~×x×

××xxxx×

x~××

t'N t",l
,-!

,..S~

!J

Z
<

~XX

XXXX

XXXXXXX

X~XX

.<

A

o,..,
©

×~×

××××

×××××x×

×~×x
<"u
<

~ "a

0
©

~=

<

×~<× x × × ×

x××x×××

×~<xx

©

,~¢.,

A Comparison of Microbial Community Characteristics

303

a representative aromatic compound since it is present in substantial quantities in
processed petroleum products. The presence of decane and/or toluene degraders can
be interpreted as an indication of the microbial communities' ability to metabolize
aliphatic and aromatic hydrocarbons, respectively. The numbers of decane-specific
degraders in all samples tested varied from 3.0 × 101 to 5.5 X 105 degraders per
gram soil dry weight (Table 3). Decane degrader enumerations were not available
for any of the pristine aquifer samples. Decane-degrader populations tended to be
larger in petroleum-exposed samples. The numbers of toluene-specific degraders
ranged from 2 X 10o to 6.5 X 10 4 degraders per gram soil dry weight (Table 3).
Toluene-specific degrader populations were at least an order of magnitude higher
in samples from the contaminated sites as compared to the pristine aquifer samples.
The numbers of decane-specific degraders were an order of magnitude higher than
the number of toluene specific degraders in all but two samples. These results
indicate that aliphatic hydrocarbon metabolic capabilities were more widespread
than aromatic hydrocarbon metabolic capabilities for the compounds tested. Similar
results were reported in a study of a single aquifer by Aelion and Bradley [1].
The relationships between microbial community characteristics and pollutant
exposure, and sample depth were compared using correlation analysis. A tabulation
of the correlation coefficients (r z values) and P values are presented in Table 4.
The relationships that were significant at greater than the 85% confidence level
are shown in bold type and include the parameters of depth and AODC for all
sample groups except the low-level exposure group, depth, and MPN of toluenespecific degraders for the low-exposure group, the MPNs of amino acid and
decane-specific degraders for the low-exposure group, and when all samples were
compared. Statistical theory predicts that approximately 5 of the 31 relationships
tested would prove significant at greater than the 85% confidence level. However,
since five of the correlations were significant at greater than the 99% confidence
level, these correlations probably reflect real relationships between variables tested.

Discussion

In pristine and uncontaminated samples, statistical analyses indicate total cell counts
(AODCs) were related to depth (Table 4). The deeper samples contained smaller
total microbial populations. A similar pattern in AODC bacteria was reported
by Webster et al. [43] and by Ghiorse and Balkwill [16]. In other studies of
uncontaminated aquifer soils, no significant change in AODC as a function of
sample depth or saturation was reported [5, 44]. For the samples evaluated in this
study, numbers of amino acid-specific degraders varied considerably from sample
to sample and probably reflect soil and site heterogeneity.
Exposure to petroleum contamination apparently altered the microbial community structure. The relationship between sample depth and total microbial community size did not exist among the samples exposed to low levels of petroleum
contamination. In samples only exposed to contaminants as migrating vapors or
dissolved phases at parts per billion (ppb) levels, the numbers of toluene degraders
increased with depth. Toluene has been reported to have a Microtox EC50 of 17-43
mg/liter [40, 41] and to inhibit activated sludge respiration at less than 200 rag/
liter [14]. Since toluene has a water solubility of over 500 mg/liter [37], it is

304

S.C. Long et a].

V

V

.~A
~ o < ~ < < < < <

~d dZ
~

- Z dZ Z Z Z

~

~ZZZZZ

m

©

&
e-,
©

r-,

~" d<o Z~d d <
~<<
ZoZZ
V

o'-a
~dd

dd

d

©

©

E=

~<<<<<<<<<
~ZZZZZZZZZ
©

~ < < < < < < < < <

8~

~ZZZZZZZZZ

o E

z

z

~

-1

~ ~~ 0 ,0 <,

= = = =

D~DD<<<<<~

~N
<

<

A Comparison of Microbial CommunityCharacteristics

305

possible that the higher levels of toluene exposure closer to the water table surface
exerted toxicity on the microbial degrader community. As the dissolved toluene
concentration was attenuated deeper in the aquifer formation, the addition of the
biodegradable carbon source may have led to the higher observed densities of
toluene-specific degraders. The numbers of amino acid-specific degraders were
highly correlated to the numbers of decane-specific degraders. The relative proportion of decane-specific degraders was higher in petroleum-exposed samples than
in pristine and uncontaminated samples. These two results, in combination, indicate
that contaminant-adapted communities are present in the petroleum-exposed
samples.
In highly contaminated samples, smaller total microbial populations were found
with increasing depth; however, microbial activity tended to increase with depth.
These results, when compared to the results from the low-exposure samples, suggest
that petroleum contaminants exert toxic effects on a portion of the active microbial
community at high exposures and enrich specific degraders with exposure to ppb
levels of dissolved contaminants. Federle et al. [15] also noted that numbers of
specific degraders were a function of the site of sample collection.
Three possible mechanisms have been described that can result in observable
changes in community structure [23]. These mechanisms are induction/derepression
of specific enzymes, genetic changes that result in new metabolic capabilities, and
selective enrichment of organisms able to transform the compound(s) of interest.
Aquifer systems are generally considered oligotrophic systems, the results of this
study indicate that the addition of organic carbon and energy in the form of petroleum
pollutants exerts a selective force that can alter the microbial community structure.
The data indicate that a combination of one or more of the mechanisms described
here has acted to affect the microbial communities in the aquifers studied. It is likely
that the enrichment of degrader organisms is the predominating mechanism.
When all samples were compared, the AODCs were correlated (? = 0.62) to
sample depth at greater than 99.9% confidence level (P < 0.001). Activity measurements for amino acid-specific degraders and decane-specific degraders were highly
correlated (r 2 = 0.91) at greater than 99.9% confidence level (P < 0.001). No other
correlations were demonstrated. Consistent with those generally described for
petroleum contamination [4], these results indicate that decane metabolism is fairly
widespread such that larger, metabolically active, microbial communities evidenced
by greater MPNs of amino acid-specific degraders also contained larger numbers
and proportions of decane-specific degraders. However, it can be suggested that
toluene degradation is more strongly linked to prior exposure to toluene at levels
that do not produce a toxic response.
The results of this research indicate that microbial community size and degrader
composition reflect soil and site heterogeneities and can be altered by exposure
to pollutants. Although the study was limited to oligotrophic fine sand, and sand
and gravel aquifers, the data indicate that for these systems, total cell counts using
AODC do not indicate the density and activity of pollutant degrader populations
present in a contaminated aquifer system. The metabolic capability to degrade
aliphatic pollutants, specifically decane, is likely to be related to the size of the
metabolically active microbial community. The metabolic capability to degrade
mono aromatic pollutants, specifically toluene, is likely to be related to the level
of pollutant exposure. Higher levels of pollutant exposure (milligrams per liter

306

S.C. Long et al.

and N A P L ) m a y inhibit aromatic degrader populations, w h i l e l o w - l e v e l pollutant
exposure ( m i cr o g r a m s per liter) will enrich for aromatic degrader populations.
Th es e results indicate that enumerations o f pollutant-specific degraders m a y yield
m o r e i n f o rm at i o n as to the potential for p e t r o l e u m - c o n t a m i n a n t b i o r e m e d i a t i o n than
w o u l d general c o m m u n i t y size ( A O D C ) or activity (amino acid-specific degraders).

Acknowledgment. This research was funded in part by a grant from the US Environmental Protection
Agency Office of Ground Water Research, a grant from the Naval Civil Engineering Laboratory, a
grant from the South Carolina Hazardous Waste Management Research Fund, and a National Science
Foundation Presidential Faculty Fellow Award--C. Marjorie Aelion.

References
1. Aelion CM, Bradley PM (1991) Aerobic biodegradation potential of subsurface microorganisms
from a jet fuel-contaminated aquifer. Appl Environ Microbiol 57:57-63
2. Aelion CM, Swindoll CM, Pfaender FK (1987) Adaptation to and biodegradation of xenobiotic
compounds by microbial communities from a pristine aquifer. Appl Environ Microbiol 53:
2212-2217
3. American Petroleum Institute (1992) Basic petroleum data book: petroleum industrial statistics.
Washington, DC
4. Atlas RM, Bartha RC (1993) Microbial ecology: fundamentals and applications, 3rd ed. Benjamin
Cummings Publishing, Menlo Park, California
5. Balkwill DL, Ghiorse WC (1985) Characterization of subsurface bacteria associated with two
shallow aquifers in Oklahoma. Appl Environ Microbiol 50:580-588
6. Beeman RE, Suflita JM (1987) Microbial ecology of a shallow unconfined ground water aquifer
polluted by municipal landfill leachate. Microb Ecol 14:39-54.
7. Clarke KR, Owen NJP (1983) A simple and versatile micro-computer program for the determination
of "most probable number." J Microbial Method 1:133-137
8. Cobet AB, Guard HE (1973) Effect of a bunker fuel on the beach bacterial flora. In: Proceedings
of joint conference on prevention and control of oil spills: March 13-15, Washington, DC
9. Colwell RR, Walker JD (1977) Ecological aspects of microbial degradation of petroleum in the
marine environment. CRC Crit Rev Microbiol 5:423-445
10. Dobbins DC (1989) Variations in biodegradation rates of four different organic substrates and in
other microbiological parameters among subsurface solids samples. Doctoral dissertation, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
11. Dobbins DC, Aelion CM, Pfaender FK (1992) Subsurface, terrestrial microbial ecology and
biodegradation of organic chemicals: a review. CRC Crit Rev Environ Control 22:67-136
12. Dobbins DC, Pfaender FK (1988) Methodology for assessing respiration and cellular incorporation
of radiolabeled substrates by soil microbial communities. Microb Ecol 15:257-273
13. Dunlap WJ, McNabb JF, Sccalf MR, Cosby RL (1977) Sampling of organic chemicals and
microorganisms in the subsurface. EPA-600/2-77-176. US Environmental Protection Agency,
Washington, DC
14. Elnabarawy MT, Robideau RR, Beach SA (1988) Comparison of three rapid toxicity test procedures: Microtox, Polytox, and activated sludge respiration inhibition. Toxicity Assess 3:361-370
15. Federle TW, Dobbins DC, Thornton-Manning JR, Jones DD (1986) Microbial biomass activity
and community structure in subsurface soils. Ground Water 24:365-374
16. Ghiorse WC, Balkwill DL (1983) Enumeration and morphological characterization of bacteria
indigenous to subsurface environments. Dev Ind Microbiol 24:213-244
17. Ghiorse WC, Wilson JT (1988) Microbial ecology of the terrestrial subsurface. Adv Appl Microbiol 33:107-173
18. Harvey RW, Smith RL, George L (1984) Effect of contamination upon microbial distributions
and heterotrophic uptake in a Cape Cod, Mass., Aquifer. Appl Environ Microbiol 48:1197-1202
19. Hillger RW, Griffiths RA (1992) Remediation of leaking USTs: a system for accessing case
histories and related documents. J Air Waste Manage Assoc 42:289-302

A Comparison of Microbial Community Characteristics

307

20. Long SC (1986) A descriptive study of the degradation of natural and xenobiotic compounds by
the subsurface microbial community from an aquifer in Lula, Oklahoma. Master's thesis, University
of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
21. Long SC (1994) Biodegradation of petroleum constituents by aquifer microbial communities.
Doctoral dissertation, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
22. Lovley DR, Baedecker MJ, Lonergan DJ, Cozzarelli IM, Phillips EJR Siegel DI (1989) Oxidation
of aromatic contaminants coupled to microbial iron reduction. Nature 339:297-300
23. Leahy JG, Colwell RR (1990) Microbial degradation of hydrocarbons in the environment. Microbiol Rev 54:305-315
24. McNabb JF, Dunlap WJ (1975) Subsurface biological activity in relation to ground-water pollution.
Ground Water 13:3344
25. Miller CT (1988) Personal communication, Department of Environmental Sciences and Engineering, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
26. Mu DY, Scow KM (1994) Effect of trichloroethylene (TCE) and toluene concentrations on TCE
and toluene biodegradation and the population density of TCE and toluene degraders in soil. Appl
Environ Microbiol 60:2661-2665
27. Pfaender FK, Buckley EN III (1984) Effects of petroleum on microbial communities. In: Atlas
RM (ed) Petroleum microbiology. Macmillan, New York, pp. 475-536
28. RMT, Inc. (1988) Final report: Aquifer evaluation, Defense Fuel Supply Point. January
29. Somerville CC, Monti CA, Spain JC (1985) Modification of the ~4C most probable number method
for use with nonpolar and volatile substrates. Appl Environ Microbiol 49:7t 1-713
30. Standard methods for the examination of water and wastewater, 18th ed. (1992) American Public
Health Association, Washington, DC
31. Suflita JM, Gibson SA, Beeman RE (1988) Anaerobic biotransformation of pollutant chemicals
in aquifers. J Industrial Microbiol 3:79-194
32. Swindoll CM, Aelion CM, Dobbins DC, Jiang O, Long SC, Pfaender FK (1988) Aerobic biodegradation of natural and xenobiotic organic compounds by subsurface microbial communities. Environ
Tox Chem 7:291-299
33. Swindoll CM, Aelion CM, Pfaender FK (1988) Influence of inorganic and organic nutrients on
aerobic biodegradation and on the adaptation response of subsurface microbial communities. Appl
Environ Microbiol 54:212-217
34. Thomas JM, Lee MD, Ward CH (1987) Use of ground water in assessment of biodegradation
potential in the subsurface. Environ Tox Chem 6:607-614
35. Underground storage tanks: technical requirements and state program approval, final rules. (1988)
Federal Register 53:37082-37247
36. Ventullo RM, Larson RJ (1985) Metabolic diversity and activity of heterotrophic bacteria in
ground water. Environ Tox Chem 4:759-771
37. Verschueren K (1983) Handbook of environmental data on organic chemicals, 2nd ed. Van
Nostrand Reinhold, New York
38. Vestal R, Cooney JJ, Crow S, Berger J (1984) The effects of hydrocarbons on aquatic microorganisms. In: Atlas RM (ed) Petroleum microbiology. Macmillan, New York, pp. 475-536.
39. Waksman SA (1916) Bacterial numbers in soils, at different depths, and in different seasons of
the year. Soil Sci 1:363-380
40. Walker JD (1988) Effects of chemicals on microorganisms. J WPCF 60:1106-1121
41. Walker JD (1989) Effects of chemicals on microorganisms. J WPCF 6l:1077-1097
42. Ward TE (1985) Characterizing the aerobic and anaerobic microbial activities on surface and
subsurface soils. Environ Tox Chem 4:727-737
43. Webster JJ, Hampton GJ, Wilson JT, Ghiorse WC, Leach FR (1985) Determination of microbial
cell numbers in subsurface samples. Ground Water 23:17-25
44. Wilson JT, McNabb JF, Balkwill DL, Ghiorse WC (1983) Enumeration and characterization of
bacteria indigenous to a shallow water-table aquifer. Ground Water 21:134-142
45. Wilson JT, McNabb JF, Cochran JW. Wang TH, Tomson MB, Bedient PD (1985) Influence of
microbial adaptation on the fate of organic pollutants in ground water. Environ Tox Chem
4:721-726


