A53
J . Chem. Tech. Biotechnol. 1991, 52, 149-156

Microbial Hydrocarbon Degradation-Bioremediation
Oil Spills

of

Ronald M. Atlas
Department of Biology, University of Louisville, Louisville, Kentucky 40292, USA
(Received 18 December 1990; accepted 29 January 1991)

A BSTRA CT
Bioremediation has become a major method employed in restoration of
oil-polluted environments that makes use of natural microbial biodegradative
activities. Bioremediation of petroleum pollutants overcomes the fuctors
limiting rates of microbial hydrocarbon biodegradation. Often this involves
using the enzymatic capabilities of the indigenous hydrocarbon-degrading
microbial populations and modfying environmental factors, particularly
concentrations of molecular oxygen, fixed forms of nitrogen, and phosphate
to achieve enhanced rates of’hydrocurbon biodegradation. Biodegradution
of oily sludges and bioremediation of oil-contaminated sites has been
achieved by oxygen addition-e.g., by tilling soils in landfarming and by
adding hydrogen peroxide or pumping oxygen into oiled aquifers along with
addition of nitrogen- and phosphorous-containing ,fertilizers. The success of
seeding oil spills with microbial preparations is ambiguous. Successful
bioreniediation of a major marine oil spill has been achieved based upon
addition of nitrogen and phosphorus fertilizers.
K e y words: oil bioremediation, hydrocarbon degradation, marine
contamination, soil contamination, groundwater contamination.

1 MICROBIAL DEGRADATION OF PETROLEUM HYDROCARBONS

The spill of more than 200000 barrels of crude oil from the oil tanker Exxon
Valdez in Prince William Sound, Alaska on 24 March 1989, as well as smaller
spills in Texas, Rhode Island and the Delaware Bay, has focused attention on the
problem of hydrocarbon contamination in marine and estuarine environments
and the role of microbial hydrocarbon degradation in the removal of petroleum
149

J . Chem. Tech. Biotechnol. 0268-2575/91/$03.50

0 1991 SCI. Printed in Great Britain

R . M . Atlas

150

pollutants.' Biodegradation of hydrocarbons by natural populations of
microorganisms represents one of the primary mechanisms by which petroleum
Rates
and other hydrocarbon pollutants are eliminated from the
of biodegradation under optimal laboratory conditions have been reported to be
as high as 2500-100 000 g m P 3day-' (Ref. 5), under in-situ conditions petroleum
biodegradation rates are orders of magnitude lower, in the range 0.001-60 g m - 3
day-'.
2 FACTORS DETERMINING RATES OF PETROLEUM
BIODEGRADATION

The rates of petroleum hydrocarbon biodegradation in the environment are
determined by the populations of indigenous hydrocarbon degrading microorganisms, the physiological capabilities of those populations, and various
abiotic factors that influence growth rates of those hydrocarbon-degrading
microbial population^.^,^ The persistence of petroleum pollutants depends on the
quantity and quality of the hydrocarbon mixture and on the properties of the
affected ecosystem. In one environment petroleum hydrocarbons can persist
indefinitely, whereas under another set of conditions the same hydrocarbons can
be completely biodegraded within a relatively few hours or days.
Prior exposure of a microbial community to hydrocarbons is important in
determining how rapidly subsequent hydrocarbon inputs can be b i ~ d e g r a d e d . ~
Communities exposed to hydrocarbons become adapted, exhibiting selective
enrichment and genetic changes resulting in increased proportions of
hydrocarbon-degrading bacteria and bacterial plasmids encoding hydrocarbon
catabolic genes. In unpolluted environments hydrocarbon degraders generally
constitute less than 1 % of the microbial community, whereas in oil polluted
ecosystems hydrocarbon degraders often represent 1-1 0% of microorganisms.6
Since adapted microbial communities have higher proportions of hydrocarbon
degraders, they can respond to the presence of hydrocarbon pollutants within
hours, In the case of the Amoco Cudiz and Tunio spills along the coast of Brittany,
France, for example, the adapted hydrocarbon-degrading populations increased
by several orders of magnitude and biodegradation occurred as fast or faster than
evaporation in the days following the spills.
The physical state of petroleum hydrocarbons has a marked effect on their
biodegradation. At very low concentrations hydrocarbons are soluble in water,
but most oil spill incidents release petroleum hydrocarbons in concentrations far
in excess of the solubility limits. The degree of spreading determines in part the
surface area of oil available for microbial colonization by hydrocarbon-degrading
microorganisms; in aquatic systems, the oil normally spreads, forming a thin slick.
Microbial degradation of oil has been shown to occur by attack on aliphatic
or light aromatic fractions of the oil, with high-molecular-weight aromatics, resins,
and asphaltenes considered to be recalcitrant or exhibiting only very low rates of
biodegradation, although some studies have reported their removaL4 Generally,
it has been considered that straight chain alkanes are easiest to degrade.2 There

Microbial hydrocarbon deyradatian-bioremedia~i~~
of oil spills

151

have been some reports of low molecular weight aromatics being attacked more
rapidly than the alkane^.^ Foght et a1.* reported that the microorganisms that
degrade aromatic hydrocarbons may be distinct from those that attack aliphatic
hydrocarbons. Microbial isolates that utilize hexadecane cannot grow on
phenanthrene and vice versa. Thus, the degradation of different classes of
hydrocarbons may be carried out by totally different populations of
microorganisms.
The polynuclear aromatic hydrocarbons are more difficult to biodegrade than
one- and two-ring aromatics and are more resistant to microbial attack than
unsubstituted hydrocarbons. As biodegradation procedes branched hydrocarbons,
such as pristanes, and substituted polynuclear aromatics, such as C3
phenanthrenes, usually constitute an increasing proportion of the residual
hydrocarbon mixture. Interestingly, the induction of enzymes for polycyclic
aromatic hydrocarbon degradation depends upon lower molecular weight
aromatics such as naphthalene;' the finding that the enzymes for degrading at
least some polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons are not induced by the substrate itself
is important and may explain the apparent resistance of these compounds to
microbial attack. Although degraded at slower rates, these compounds are
eventually converted to carbon dioxide and water by microorganisms.
Mycobacteria have been isolated that degrade 4-ring polynuclear aromatic
hydrocarbons." Keck et al." found evidence of cooxidation of aromatic
hydrocarbons in soil; they found that 4- and 5-ring PAHs disappeared rapidly
from soils amended with complex wastes.
Bertrand et a1." found that the microbial degradation of asphaltenes and resins,
which had previously been considered relatively recalcitrant to biodegradation,
may be due to cooxidation. Rontani et al.13 also found evidence for cooxidation
of asphaltenes; they reported degradation of asphaltenic compounds in mixed
bacterial cultures to be dependent upon the presence of n-alkanes 12 to 18 carbon
atoms in length.
Temperature affects the rates of microbial hydrocarbon degrading activities by
its effect on the physical nature and chemical composition of the oil (particularly
the surface area available for microbial colonization and the hydrocarbons
remaining after evaporation for microbial metabolic attack) and the rates of
hydrocarbon metabolism by microorganism^.^^^ At low temperatures, the viscosity
of the oil increases, the volatilization of toxic short-chain alkanes is reduced, and
their water solubility is increased, delaying the onset of biodegradation. Rates of
degradation are generally observed to decrease with decreasing temperature; this
is believed to be a result primarily of decreased rates of enzymatic activity, or the
Qlo effect. Higher temperatures increase the rates of hydrocarbon metabolism to
a maximum, typically in the range of 30 to 40°C, above which the toxicity of
hydrocarbons is increased. l4 There are some thermophilic alkane-utilizing bacteria,
including obligate hydrocarbon utilizers, some of which having been isolated from
deep sea thermal vent region^.'^.'^
The initial steps in the biodegradation of hydrocarbons by bacteria and fungi
involve the oxidation of the substrate by oxygenases for which molecular oxygen
is required.2 Aerobic conditions are, therefore, necessary for this route of microbial

R . M . Atlas

152

oxidation of hydrocarbons in the environment. The availability of oxygen in soils,
sediments, and aquifers is often limiting and dependent on the type of soil and
whether the soil is waterlogged. Anaerobic degradation of petroleum hydrocarbons
by microorganisms 0ccurs.l ',I8 The rates of anaerobic hydrocarbon biodegradation,
however, are very low and its ecological significance appears to be minor."
Several investigators have reported that concentrations of available nitrogen
and phosphorus in seawater are severely limiting to microbial hydrocarbon
d e g r a d a t i ~ n . ~Some
.~
investigators, however, have reached the opposite
conclusion, i.e., that nitrogen and phosphorous are not limiting in seawater.20The
difference in results is paradoxical and appears to be based on whether the studies
are aimed at assessing the biodegradation of hydrocarbons within an oil slick or
the biodegradation of soluble hydrocarbons. When considering soluble
hydrocarbons, nitrogen and phosphorus are probably not limiting since the
solubility of the hydrocarbons is so low as to preclude establishment of an
unfavorable C/N or C/P ratio. Investigators considering the fate of low-level
discharges of hydrocarbons (soluble hydrocarbons) have, thus, properly concluded
that available nutrient concentrations are adequate to support hydrocarbon
biodegradation.

3 BIOREMEDIATION OF OIL CONTAMINATED SOIL AND
GROUNDWATER
Recognizing that rates of hydrocarbon biodegradation often are limited by
environmental activities or possibly by adapted microbial populations, it is
possible to carry out programs to overcome these limitations. Bioremediation
involves the use of microorganisms to remove pollutants.*' Effective
bioremediation converts hydrocarbons to nontoxic products-water and carbon
dioxide. The two general approaches to bioremediation are environmental
modification, such as through fertilizer application and aeration, and addition of
adapted hydrocarbon degraders by seeding.
In soils and groundwaters oxygen is often limiting and the use of tilling, forced
aeration, and hydrogen peroxide treatment can be useful in overcoming the rate
limitation caused by low molecular oxygen a ~ a i l a b i l i t y . The
~ ~ . ~use
~ of forced
aeration and nutrient supplementation has been used to stimulate the
biodegradation of gasoline in g r o ~ n d w a t e r . ~Most
~ , ~ ~groundwater supplies
contain a microbial population capable of oil biodegradation. However, conditions
for growth and metabolism of oil usually are limiting. Raymond et
found
forced aeration and nitrogen and phosphorus addition could significantly reduce
the time necessary to remove spilled gasoline from a contaminated groundwater
reservoir. They added ammonium sulfate, monosodium phosphate, and disodium
phosphate to gasoline-contaminated groundwater. Air was also pumped into the
groundwater with a small compressor. This treatment increased the number of
hydrocarbon-utilizing microorganisms, and it was estimated that 1000 barrels of
gasoline were removed by stimulated degradation.
Several investigators have examined the feasibility of using landfarming for

Microbial hydrocarbon degradation-bioremediation

of oil spills

153

removal of oily waste^.^^.^^ There have been some reports on mobilization of oil
into the soil column, but in most cases there has been little evidence for significant
downward leaching of oil. Wang and Bartha27 recently studied the effects of
bioremediation on residues of fuel spills in soil (2.3 cm3 cm-3 of jet fuel, heating
oil and diesel oil, respectively). Persistence and toxicity of the fuel increased in
the order of jet fuel < heating oil <diesel oil. Bioremediation treatment strongly
decreased fuel persistence and toxicity and increased microbial activity as compared
to contaminated but untreated soil. Bioremediation treatment remediated fuel
spill-contaminated soils in 4-6 weeks to a degree that can support plant cover.
Wang et
reported that bioremediation treatment almost completely eliminated
PAHs in 12 weeks. Without bioremediation, 12.5-32.5% of the higher weight PAH
was still present at 12 weeks. After substantial initial mutagenicity and toxicity,
the contaminated soil approached the background level of uncontaminated soil
after 12 weeks of bioremediation. Detoxification was complete in 20 weeks. Song
et
bioremediated laboratory spills of gasoline, jet fuel, heating oil, diesel oil,
and bunker C oil on soils, concluding that with bioremediation treatment it should
be possible to reduce hydrocarbons to insignificant levels in contaminated soils
withon one growing season.

4 BIOREMEDIATION OF MARINE OIL SPILLS

The Exxon Vuldez spill formed the basis for a major study on bioremediation and
the largest application of this emerging te~hnology.~'
The initial approach to the
cleanup of the oil spilled from the Exxon Vuldez was physical. Washing of oiled
shorelines with high pressure water was expensive and cleaned shorelines became
reoiled forcing recleaning. Bioremediation, therefore, was considered as a method
to augment other cleanup procedures. The USEPA and Exxon entered into an
agreement jointly to explore the feasibility of using bioremediation. The project
focused on determining whether nutrient augmentation could stimulate rates of
biodegradation. Three types of nutrient supplementation were considered: water
soluble (23:2 N : P garden fertilizer formulation): slow release (isobutylenediurea
or encapsulated N + P); and oleophilic (Inipol EAP 22 = oleic acid, urea, lauryl
phosphate). Each fertilizer was tested in laboratory simulations and in field
demonstration plots to show the efficacy of nutrient supplementation.
Consideration was also given to potential adverse ecological effects, particularly
entrophication due to algal blooms and toxicity to fish and invertebrates. The
application of the oleophilic fertilizer produced very dramatic results, stimulating
biodegradation such that the surfaces of the oil-blackened rocks on the shoreline
turned white and were essentially oil-free within 10 days after treatment. The use
of Inipol and a slow release fertilizer was approved for shoreline treatment and
was used as a major part of the cleanup effort. A joint Exxon-USEPA-State of
Alaska monitoring effort followed the effectiveness of the bioremediation treatment
which was estimated to increase the rates of biodegradation at least three-fold.
Owing to its effectiveness bioremediation became the major treatment method for
removing oil pollutants from the impacted shorelines of Prince William Sound.

R . M . Atlas

154

Another approach for treating oil spills that has been considered but never field
tested involves seeding with genetically engineered microorganisms. The potential
for creating, through genetic manipulation, microbial strains able to degrade a
variety of different types of hydrocarbons has been demonstrated. The genetic
information for at least some enzymes involved in alkane and simple aromatic
hydrocarbon transformation occurs on plasm id^^^*^^ and the use of a strain with
engineered plasmids as an inoculum during seeding would preclude the problems
associated with competition between strains in a mixed culture. However, there
is considerable controversy surrounding the release of such genetically engineered
microorganisms into the environment, and field testing of these organisms must
therefore be delayed until the issues of safety, containment, and potential for
ecological damage are resolved.33 A hydrocarbon-degrading pseudomonad was
engineered by Chakrabarty and was the organism that the Supreme Court of the
United States, in a landmark decision, ruled could be patented. The organism
engineered by Chakrabarty is capable of degrading a number of low molecular
weight aromatic hydrocarbons, but does not degrade the higher molecular weight
persistent polynuclear aromatics and thus has not been considered for use in the
bioremediation of oil spills. Given the current regulatory framework for the
deliberate release of genetically engineered microorganisms, it is unlikely that any
such organism would gain the necessary regulatory approval in time to be of much
use in treating an oil spill.
Seeding with nongenetically engineered bacteria was used for offshore oil spilled
by the tanker Mega Borg. Bioremediation of the Mega Borg spill off the Texas
coast consisted of applying a seed culture with a secret catalyst produced by Alpha
Corporation to the oil at sea.34 The rationale for this approach to seeding is that
indigenous microbial populations may not be capable of degrading the wide range
of potential substrates present in such complex mixtures as petroleum. However,
the premises that the microorganisms naturally present in an environment
subjected to contamination with oil would be incapable of extensively degrading
petroleum and that added microorganisms would be able to do a superior job
need to be examined carefully. Claims were made that the seeding treatment of
the Mega Borg spill was successful at completely removing the oil, but the
effectiveness of the Alpha seeding to stimulate biodegradation has not been verified,
nor has the effectiveness of the culture been confirmed by the USEPA in laboratory
tests.

5 CONCLUSIONS

Environmental rates of hydrocarbon degradation are limited by the enzymatic
capabilities of the indigenous hydrocarbon-degrading microbial populations and
by environmental factors, particularly concentrations of molecular oxygen, fixed
forms of nitrogen, and phosphate. Bioremediation of oil pollutants invoives
overcoming the rate limiting factors. Biodegradation of oily sludges and
bioremediation of oil-contaminated sites has been achieved by oxygen
addition-e.g., by tilling soils in landfarming and by adding hydrogen peroxide

Microbial hydrorarhon degradation-hioremediation

of

oil spills

155

or pumping oxygen into oiled aquifers along with addition of nitrogen- and
phosphorus-containing fertilizers. Seeding with a special microbial preparation
was used to treat the Texas Mega Borg spill but the success of this treatment is
ambiguous. Exxon successfully used bioremediation, principally based upon
addition of a n oleophilic nitrogen and phosphorus fertilizer, to degrade oil in
rocky shorelines impacted by the 1989 Alaskan oil spill. Bioremediation has become
a major method employed in restoration of oil-polluted environments that makes
use of natural microbial biodegradative activities.

REFERENCES
I . Anon., Mishaps cause three oil spills off US. Oil Gas J., 87 (1989) 22.
2. Atlas, R . M. (ed.) Petroleum Microbiology, Macmillan Publishing Co., New York, 1984,
p. 692.
3. National Academy of Sciences, Oil in the sea-inputs, fates, and effects. National
Academy Press, Washington, DC, 1985.
4. Leahy, J . G. & Colwell, R. R., Microbial degradation of hydrocarbons in the
environment. Microbiol. Rev., 54 (1990) 305-15.
5. Bartha, R. & Atlas, R. M., Transport and transformations of petroleum: biological
processes. In Long-term Environmental Effects of Offshore Oil and Gas Development,
ed D. F. Boesch & N. N. Rabalais. Elsevier Applied Science, New York, 1987, pp.
287-341.
6. Atlas, R. M., Microbial degradation of petroleum hydrocarbons: an environmental
perspective. Microbiol Reu., 45 (1981) 180-209.
7. Fedorak, P. M. & Westlake, D. W. S., Microbial degradation of aromatics and
saturates in Prudhoe Bay crude oil as determined by glass capillary gas chromatography.
Can. J . Microbiol., 27 (1981) 43243.
8. Foght, J. M., Fedorak, P. M. & Westlake, D. W., Mineralization of ['4C]hexadecane
and [''Clphenanthrene in crude oil: specificity among bacterial isolates. Can. J .
Microbiol., 36 (1990) 169-75.
9. Heitkamp, M. A,, Freeman, J. P., Miller, D. W. & Cerniglia, C. E., Pyrene degradation
by a Mycobacterium sp. identification of ring oxidation and ring fission products. A p p l .
Enuiron. Microbiol., 54 (1988) 2556-65.
10. Heitkamp, M. A. & Cerniglia, C. E., Polycyclic aromatic degradation by a
Mycobacterium sp. in microcosms containing sediment and water from a pristine
ecosystem. Appl. Enuiron. Microbiol., 55 (1989) 1968-73.
11. Keck, J., Sims, R. C., Coover, M., Park, K. & Symons, B., Evidence for cooxidation
of polynuclear aromatic hydrocarbons in soil. Water Res., 23 (1989) 1467-76.
12. Bertrand, J. C., Rambeloarisoa, E., Rontani, J. F., Giusti, G. & Mattei, G., Microbial
degradation of crude oil in sea water in continuous culture. Biotechnol. Lett., 5 (1983)
567-72.
13. Rontani, J. F., Bosser-Joulak, F., Rambeloarisoa, E., Bertrand, J. C., Giusti, G. &
Faure, R., Analytical study of Asthart crude oil asphaltenes biodegradation.
Chemosphere, 14 (1985) 1413-22.
14. Bossert, I . & Bartha, R., The fate of petroleum in soil ecosystems. In Petroleum
Microbiology, ed. R. M. Atlas. Macmillan Publishing Co., New York, 1984,pp. 434-76.
15. Perry, J. J., Isolation and characterization of thermophilic hydrocarbon-utilizing
bacteria. A h . Aquat. Microhiol., 3 (1985) 109-39.
16. Bazylinski, D. A,, Wirsen, C. 0. & Jannasch, H. W., Microbial utilization of naturally
occurring hydrocarbons at the Guaymas basin hydrothermal vent site. A p p l . Environ.
Microhiol., 55 (1989) 2832-6.

156

R . M . Atlas

17. Ward, D. M. & Brock, T. D., Anaerobic metabolism of hexadecane in marine sediments.
Geomicrobiol. J . , 1 (1978) 1-9.
18. Grbic-Gallic, D. & Vogel, T. M., Transformation of toluene and benzene by mixed
methanogenic-cultures. Appl. Enuiron. Microhiol., 53 (1987) 254-60.
19. Ward, D., Atlas, R. M., Boehm, P. D. & Calder, J. A., Microbial biodegradation and
the chemical evolution of Amoco Cadiz oil pollutants. Amhio, 9 (1980)
277-83.
20. Kinney, P. J., Button, D. K. & Schell, D. M., Kinetics of dissipation and
biodegradation of crude oil in Alaska’s Cook Inlet. In Proc. Joint Conference on
Prevention and Control of Oil Spills, American Petroleum Institute, New York, 1969,
pp. 33340.
21. Atlas, R. M. & Pramer, D., Focus on bioremediation. A S M News, 56 (1990) 7.
22. American Petroleum Institute, Field study of enhanced subsurface biodegradation of
hydrocarbons using hydrogen peroxide as an oxygen source. American Petroleum
Institute Publ. 4448, American Petroleum Institute, Washington, DC, 1987.
23. Morgan, P. & Watkinson, R. J., Hydrocarbon degradation in soils and methods for
biotreatment. Crit. Rev. Biotechnol., 8 (1989) 305-33.
Gaz.
24. Raymond, R. L., Reclamation of hydrocarbon contaminated ground waters. 08.
U S Patent Ojfice, 928 (1974) 260.
25. Raymond, R. L., Jamison, V . W . & Hudson, J. O., Beneficial stimulation of bacterial
activity in ground waters containing petroleum products. In Wat~r-1976, American
Institute of Chemical Engineers, New York, 1976, pp. 319-27.
26. Bartha, R. & Bossert, I., The treatment and disposal of petroleum wastes. In Petroleum
Microbiology,ed. R . M. Atlas. Macmillan Publishing Co., New York, 1984, pp. 553-78.
27. Wang, X. & Bartha, R., Effects of bioremediation on residues: activity and toxicity in
soil contaminated by fuel spills. Soil Biol. Biochem., 22 (1990) 501-6.
28. Wang, X., Yu, X. & Bartha, R., Effect of bioremediation on polycyclic aromatic
hydrocarbon residues in soil. Enuiron. Sci. Techno!., 24 (1990) 1086-9.
29. Song, J.-G., Wang, X. & Bartha, R., Bioremediation potential of terrestrial fuel spills.
A p p l . Enoiron. Microbiol., 56 (1990) 652-6.
30. Pritchard, H. P., Bioremediation of oil contaminated beach material in Prince William
Sound, Alaska. Paper presented at the 199th National Meeting of the Arnericun Chemical
Society, Boston, Massachusetts, 22-27 April 1990, Abstract Environment 154.
31. Chakrabarty, A. M ., Microorganisms having multiple compatible degradative
energy-generating plasmids and preparation thereof. O f . Gaz. US Patent Ofice, 922
(1974) 1224.
32. Chakrabarty, A. M., Chou, G. & Gunsalus, I. C., Genetic regulation of octane
dissimilation plasmid in Pseudomonas. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U S A , 70 (1973) 113740.
33. Sussman, M. C., Collins, H., Skinner, F. A. & Stewart-Tull, D. E. (eds.), Release of
Genetically-engineered Microorganisms, Academic Press, London, 1988.
34. Mangan, K. S., University of Texas microbiologist seeks to persuade skeptical colleagues
that bacteria could be useful in cleaning up major oil spills. Chron. Higher Education,
37 (1990) A5-A9.


