B36
Using Real-Time PCR to Assess Changes in the Hydrocarbon-Degrading Microbial Community
in Antarctic Soil During Bioremediation
Shane M. Powell1,2, Susan H. Ferguson2
, John P. Bowman1 and Ian Snape2
(1) Tasmanian Institute of Agricultural Research, University of Tasmania, Hobart 7001, Australia
(2) Department of Heritage and Environment, Australian Antarctic Division, 203 Channel Highway, Kingston 7050, Australia
Received: 29 May 2006 / Accepted: 13 June 2006 / Online publication: 31 August 2006
Abstract
A real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR) method to quantify the proportion of microorganisms containing alkane monooxygenasewas developed and used to follow
changes in the microbial community in hydrocarbon contaminated
Antarctic soil during a bioremediation field trial. Assays for the alkB and rpoB genes were validated and found to be both sensitive and reproducible (less than 2% intrarun variation and 25–38% interrun variation).
Results from the real-time PCR analysis were compared to analysis of the microbial population by a culture-based technique [most probable  number (MPN) counts]. Both types of analysis indicated that fertilizer addition to hydrocarbon-contaminated soil stimulated the indigenous bacterial population within 1 year. The proportion of alkB containing microorganisms was positively correlated 
to the concentration of n-alkanes in the soil. 
After the concentration of n-alkanes in the soil
decreased, the proportion of alkane-degrading microorganisms
decreased, but the proportion of total hydrocarbon-degrading
microorganisms increased, indicating
another shift in the microbial community structure and
ongoing biodegradation.
Introduction
The ability to accurately quantify functional genes in the
environment is an important step in understanding many
ecological processes. Existing techniques include hybridization
methods such as dot blots, and end-point
polymerase chain reaction (PCR) methods such as
competitive PCR and most probable number (MPN)-
PCR. Although these methods are useful, hybridization
methods are often only semiquantitative and end-point
PCR methods require many reactions and a post-PCR
analysis step, making them both labor-intensive and
expensive. Real-time PCR is fast becoming the most
popular alternative (see [11, 16, 32] for a detailed description).
Originally developed for gene expression studies, it
has found many applications in microbial ecology. These
include the measurement of 16S rRNA genes as a measure
of total and specific cell populations [21], the measurement
of catabolic genes such as bssA [2] and atz [5] and
the measurement of genes for important ecological
processes such as denitrification [13] and ammonia
oxidation [17].
The advantages that real-time PCR offers include
speed, sensitivity, accuracy, simplicity, and the possibility
of robotic automation. As with all new technologies, there
is a need to explore and define the limitations of the
method in terms of its sensitivity, accuracy, and reproducibility.
Although the sensitivity and accuracy of realtime
PCR assays are usually well characterized (e.g., [2]),
few studies provide any data on the reproducibility of the
method. Dionisi et al. [6] reported intra- and interrun
variability and Hristova et al. [14] reported the reproducibility
per sample. A recent study by Smith et al. [22]
with the 16S rRNA gene found that the absolute gene
copy numbers were influenced by a number of factors
including the DNA isolation method and template concentration.
Their observation that the intrarun variability
was low (3–5%) but interrun variability was higher (11–
Correspondence to: Shane M. Powell; E-mail: shane.powell@aad.gov.au 26%) agrees with the conclusions of Dionisi et al. [6].
DOI: 10.1007/s00248-006-9131-z & Volume 52, 523–532 (2006) & * Springer Science+Business Media, Inc. 2006 523
Information on the reproducibility of real-time PCR
methods is particularly important given that the relationship
between the signal produced (the threshold
cycle CT) and concentration values for the amount of the
target is a log-linear one described by the equation:
CT ¼ M  log target concentration ð Þþ B
where M is the slope of the standard curve and B is the
Y intercept. This log-linear relationship has the effect
of producing large variations in concentrations between
replicates despite the fact that the raw signal is
very similar. This suggests that caution should be used
when drawing conclusions from small differences,
especially when the number of replicates (n) is small.
This effect was noted by Dionisi et al. [6], who reported
that coefficient of variation (CV = standard deviation/
mean) values calculated on the CT were much lower
than those calculated on copy number of the target
gene (2% compared to between 20% and 36%).
As part of our investigations into the biodegradation
of diesel spills in Antarctica, we wished to measure the
activity of alkane-degrading microbes in soil samples.
The alkane monooxygenases are a group of enzymes that
catalyze the first step in the aerobic degradation of
alkanes. The genetics of these enzymes are well characterized,
particularly in Pseudomonas [25, 26] and Rhodococcus
[28]. The alkB gene in particular has been found in
isolates from a variety of genera, including Pseudomonas
[25], Rhodococcus [29], Alcanivorax [10], and Xanthobacter
[27], and it has also been detected by hybridization
methods in environmental samples [30]. Alkane
monooxygenases have been detected using hybridization
methods in Antarctic and Brazilian soils [15] and in both
contaminated and pristine Arctic and Antarctic soils
[30]. A more quantitative MPN-PCR method was used
to follow populations of alkane-degrading microbes in
seawater microcosms [20], and Heiss-Blanquet et al. [12]
used a competitive PCR method to correlate alkB levels
to n-heptane degradation in freshwater and soil samples.
All these studies, however, utilized several primer sets to
target different types of alkane monooxygenases. To the
best of our knowledge, no simple and quantitative
method of measuring alkB in complex environmental
samples using one assay has been reported. In this work,
we present the development and validation of a real-time
PCR method for the alkB and rpoB genes.
We examined the effect of nutrient addition on
microbial communities in a bioremediation field trial of
hydrocarbon-contaminated, nutrient-poor Antarctic soil.
We hypothesized that hydrocarbon-degrading bacteria,
having a source of carbon not available to other heterotrophic
bacteria, would be preferentially stimulated by
the addition of nutrients. To test this, we used a combination
of molecular (real-time PCR) and culture-based
techniques to examine changes in the function of microbial
communities in this bioremediation field trial.
Materials and Methods
Bioremediation Field Trial. A landfarming bioremediation
field trial was carried out at Australia’s
Old Casey Station, East Antarctica, from 1998 to 2004,
and has been previously described in detail [8]. Soil in
the area was contaminated with 36,000 L of Special
Antarctic Blend (SAB) diesel in 1982 [23]. The field trial
consisted of sieved (4.75 mm) and homogenized soil in
clean metal containers. The containers were freedraining,
but partially buried to simulate natural field
conditions while mitigating the effects of lateral fuel
migration. Each treatment was applied to four containers.
In the current study, we were interested in the
effects of fertilization treatments [addition of two
amounts of controlled release nutrients: a low concentration
(LCRN) to yield ca. 200 NO3
– kg–1, 300 NH4
+ kg–1,
100 PO4
–3 kg–1 or a high concentration of fertilizer
(HCRN) to yield ca. 700 mg NO3
– kg–1, 900 NH4
+ kg–1,
400 PO4
–3 kg–1] on the microbial population. Both fertilization
treatments were compared to a control, which
did not receive any fertilizer. The samples used in this
study were collected in early 2000, approximately a year
after the trial was initiated, and again (from the same
plots) in 2004, after the trial had been running for 5 years.
Soil samples were stored frozen at –18-C until analysis.
DNA was extracted from approximately 0.5 g of each soil
sample by using the PowerSoil DNA kit (MoBio) following
the manufacturer’s directions. The DNA quality was
checked on agarose gels and quantified on a SmartSpec
3000 spectrophotometer (Bio-Rad). The chemical analysis
of these samples by GC-FID is described by Powell et al.
[18]. For this study, the sum of n-alkanes is the sum of
n-alkanes from octane to octadecane.
Design of Primers to Detect the Alkane Monooxygenase
Gene alkB. Primers were designed to amplify a
fragment of the alkane monooxygenase gene alkB.
Sequences (accession numbers are shown in Table 1) were
obtained from the GenBank database and aligned. Regions
of similar nucleotide composition were identified, and the
NetPrimer program (http://www.premierbiosoft.com/
netprimer/netprimer.html) was used to assist in choosing
the best primer pair that resulted in a PCR product of
approximately 100 bp. This gene is not well conserved, and
to compensate several degenerate bases were incorporated in
the primers. The forward primer f(alkBFd) is 50
-AAC TAC
MTC GAR CAY TAC GG-30 and the reverse primer
(alkBRd) is 50
-TGA MGA TGT GGT YRC TGT TCC-30
(where M = AC, R = AG and Y = CT). The specificity of
this primer pair was initially tested by using the Bsearch
for short nearly exact matches^ option of the Blast func-
524 S.M. POWELL ET AL.: MICROBIAL ECOLOGY OF BIOREMEDIATION IN ANTARCTICA
tion [1]. When this pair of primers was blasted together,
the closest matches returned were sequences from alkane
monooxygenases.
The primers were synthesized by Geneworks (Hindmarsh,
South Australia) and initially tested against two
strains of alkane-degrading Rhodococci (Rhodococcus
fascians JCM 10002 and R. rhodochrous JCM 3202) and
an Escherichia coli strain (as a negative control) using the
HotStar PCR kit (Qiagen). Amplification from genomic
DNA preparations resulted in a single band of approximately
100 bp from the two rhodococci, but no bands
were obtained from the E. coli. DNA from a soil sample
(BR106 from the field trial described above) was subjected
to the same amplification and the resulting product was
cloned using the TOPO-TA cloning kit (Invitrogen).
Plasmids were extracted by using the UltraClean miniplasmid
prep kit (MoBio) and the clones were sequenced
with the provided M13 primer using the DTCS QuickStart
kit (BeckmanCoulter) and a CEQ8000 genetic analysis
system (Beckman-Coulter).
An additional set of nondegenerate primers was
developed based on the results of this clone library.
These primers (AlkBF: 50
-AAC TAC ATC GAG CAC
TAC GG-30 and AlkBR: 50
-TGA AGA TGT GGT TGC
TGT TCC-30
) were used for all other real-time PCR
experiments.
Standards. Standards for the alkB gene were
constructed from one of the clones described above. The
plasmid was subjected to amplification with M13 primers
to obtain a PCR product approximately 300 bp long
containing the 100-bp alkB fragment. Use of the plasmid
itself may result in an incorrect determination of the
amount of DNA present due to the presence of supercoiled
DNA, and it is recommended that there is at
least 20 bp outside of the primer binding sites when constructing
standards from a PCR product (Quantitect
SYBRGreen PCR Handbook, Qiagen). The PCR product
was purified by using the UltraClean PCR cleanup kit
(MoBio) and measured spectrophotometrically at 260 nm.
This was diluted in a 10-fold series to create the standards
for a five point standard curve (5.8  104 to 5.8  108
copies) that was run in duplicate with each set of samples.
The number of copies per microliter was calculated as
follows:
– Molecular weight of fragment = 300 bp  660
Da = 1.98  105 g
– 1 molecule or 1 copy of fragment = 1.98  105
/6.02
1023 = 3.23  10–19 g
– therefore 10 ng contains 1010–9/3.23  10–19 copies =
3.04  1010 copies
Quantification of AlkB in Soil Samples. Real-time
PCR assays were carried out on a Rotorgene 3000
(Corbett) by using Quantitect SYBR green PCR kits
(Qiagen). The primer concentrations were optimized to
1 pmol of both the forward and reverse primer in each
20 mL reaction. Two microliters of template DNA (whether
sample or standard) was added to each reaction. Cycling
conditions were as follows: hold for 15 min at 94-C,
followed by 35 cycles of denaturing at 84-C for 20 s,
annealing at 50-C for 30 s, extension and acquiring signal
at 72-C for 45 s, a second acquiring step at 77-C for 15 s;
hold at 45-C for 1 min followed by a melt curve from 45-C
to 95-C. In addition to melt curve analysis, PCR products
were checked on a 2% agarose gel to ensure they were the
expected size.
Quantification of Total Bacteria in Soil Samples.
The primers described by Dahlloff et al. [4] for the
ribosomal polymerase B subunit (rpoB) gene 1698F (50
-
CAA CAT CGG TTT GAT CAA C-30
) and 2041R (30
-
CGT TGC ATG TTG GTA CCC AT-30
) were used to
quantify the total number of bacterial genomes in each
sample. Reaction conditions were the same as described
above except that 1.5 pmol of each primer was used.
Cycling conditions with these primers were as follows:
hold for 15 min at 94-C, followed by 35 cycles of
denaturing at 88-C for 30 s, annealing 50-C for 30 s,
extension and acquiring signal at 72-C for 30 s; hold at
45-C for 1 min followed by a melt curve from 45-C to
95-C. A set of standards (3.8  104 to 3.8  108 copies)
was created for this assay in the same manner as that
described above for the alkB assay.
Most Probable Number Counts. Cultivable
bacteria were enumerated using tailored versions of the
Wrenn and Venosa MPN count method [31]. Initial soil
Table 1. Accession number of sequences used in constructing
the alkB primers and the theoretical melt temperature of the
amplification product
Strain
Accession
number
Theoretical Tm
of alkB product (-C)
Rhodococcus erythropolis AJ009586 83
Rhodococcus erythropolis AJ297269 82
Rhodococcus erythropolis AJ301874 80
Rhodococcus sp. 1BN AJ401611 84
Rhodococcus sp. Q15 AF388179 80
Rhodococcus sp. Q15 AF388180 84
Rhodococcus sp. Q15 AF388181 82
Rhodococcus sp. Q15 AF388182 82
Rhodococcus fascians AJ301873 84
Burkholderia cepacia AJ293344 85
Thalassolituus oleivorans AJ431700 73
Alcanivorax borkumensis AJ577851 79
Pseudomonas fluorescens AJ009579 84
Pseudomonas aeruginosa AJ009581 83
Pseudomonas putida AJ233397 77
Pseudomonas aureofacians AJ250560 77
Xanthobacter flavus AJ418063 78
S.M. POWELL ET AL.: MICROBIAL ECOLOGY OF BIOREMEDIATION IN ANTARCTICA 525
dilutions of ca. 0.5 g soil to Bushnell–Haas broth (Difco)
were used for a four-tube MPN, with 1:10 serial dilutions
in a 96-well microtiter plates. Samples were analyzed in
triplicate. After serial dilution, 5 mL filter-sterilized
hydrocarbons (either SAB or an alkane mix containing
9.1 g decane and 4.8 g pentadecane) were applied to the
surface of the broth. The last row of wells were not
inoculated and served as a negative control for growth.
After 14 days incubation at 10-C, 50 mL of a 3%
iodonitrotetrazolium violet (Sigma) solution was added
to each of the wells and incubated overnight. Tubes were
scored as positive on the formation of a pink precipitate.
Total heterotrophic bacteria were also enumerated, in
triplicate, in a similar manner except that half-strength
tryptone soya broth was used instead of Bushnell–Haas
plus hydrocarbons and positive tubes were indicated by
turbidity after 7 days incubation.
Results
Validation of Real-Time PCR Methods. Thirty-six
sequences were obtained from the clones (created with
the degenerate primer set), and of these 29 (80%) were
related to alkane monooxygenase genes, mostly from
Pseudomonas species. These sequences were used to
design a set of nondegenerate primers by replacing the
degenerate bases with the base most frequently found in
that position in our clones. Although this increases the
specificity of the assay and probably results in some
variations of the gene not being detected, it is necessary
to avoid the problem of differing amplification efficiencies
created by the use of degenerate primers.
Melt-curve analysis was used to check for the
production of secondary products such as primer dimers
in the assays. It was observed in early runs with low DNA
template concentrations that there were sometimes two
peaks in the melt curves of both the alkB and rpoB gene
assays: one with a melt temperature (Tm) at around 81-C
or 86-C, respectively, and a second, smaller peak at 87-C
or 91-C (e.g., Fig. 1A). The peak with the lower Tm was
consistently present and on 2% agarose gels corresponded
to a band of the expected size. The other peak
was only present when the DNA template concentration
was low or primer concentration was high and showed
up as a faint fuzzy band of less than 100 bp on 2%
agarose gels. A second primer dimer with a Tm of 72-C
was also observed in some samples (Fig. 1B). Melt curves
from optimized rpoB assays showing the presence of a
small amount of product in the negative control are
shown in Fig. 1C.
Differences in the Tm of the alkB PCR product
(Fig. 1D) were observed between pure cultures (e.g.,
Pseudomonas aeruginosa, 81-C), soil samples (80.5-C),
marine sediment samples (83-C), and the PCR product
standard (82-C). Although the peaks were at slightly
different temperatures, there was only a single peak for
each sample, and when run on a 2% agarose gel the PCR
products were the same size. The theoretical melt
temperature of the expected product from each of the
strains listed in Table 1 was calculated by using the
Biomath calculator for melting temperature available at
http://www.promega.com/biomath/default.htm (Promega).
The range of melt temperatures calculated was
quite large—up to 4-C within the same species and 12-C
over different species (Table 1).
The standard curves for both assays were linear
(r
2 9 0.95) over 8 orders of magnitude for the alkB assay
and 6 orders of magnitude for the rpoB gene assay. This
equated to a lower limit of 3 copies mL–1 for the alkB
assay and 1880 copies mL–1 for the rpoB assay. The r
2
values were consistently greater than 0.95 and usually
greater than 0.99 for both assays. Once the primer
concentration was optimized, the efficiency of the reactions
was between 0.9 and 1.1 (or 90–110%). Runs that fell
outside these parameters (r
2 G 0.95 and efficiency G0.9 or
91.1) were repeated. There was usually no signal in the
no-template control for the alkB assay, but for the rpoB
assay the signal in the no-template control was generally
between 1  103 and 5  103 copies mL–1.
To assess the within-run reproducibility of the
assays, the same sample was analyzed six times within
the same run. The CV for both assays was low when
calculated on the CT values: 1.4% for the alkB gene assay
and 1.2% for the rpoB gene assay, but much higher when
calculated on the number of copies mL–1: 16% and 18%,
respectively.
The between-run reproducibility was assessed by
including duplicates of the same sample with each run.
As the selected threshold value varied for each run, the
CV could only be calculated on the concentration of each
target gene. The variability measured in this way was
higher than the within-run variation: 25% for the alkB
gene and 38% for the rpoB gene.
Field Trial Results. Student’s t test was used to
determine which treatments and/or times were signi-
ficantly different from each other (Table 2). The MPN
results were very variable, much more than the real-time
PCR results. This variability meant that none of the
differences between groups are significant at p G 0.05
although differences between groups could be detected at
the p G 0.15 level for the MPN results. All the real-time
PCR results were tested for significance at p G 0.05.
In the samples from 2000, which were taken approximately
1 year after the addition of fertilizer to the soil,
only the LCRN treatment has significantly more copies of
the alkB gene g–1 soil (Fig. 2A and Table 2). Both the
LCRN and HCRN treatments have significantly more
copies of rpoB than the control (Fig. 2C and Table 2).
There are no significant differences, for any of the MPN
526 S.M. POWELL ET AL.: MICROBIAL ECOLOGY OF BIOREMEDIATION IN ANTARCTICA
results, between any of the groups in 2000 (Fig. 2B, D, H
and Table 2). The ratio of number of copies of the alkB
gene (specific to some bacteria) to the rpoB gene (present
in all bacteria) was used to look for changes in the microbial
population structure (Fig. 2E). This ratio was significantly
lower in the HCRN treatment than in the control
(Table 2).
After a further 4 years in situ, more differences could
be observed between the control and the fertilization
treatments. The number of copies of both the alkB gene
and the rpoB gene g–1 soil are significantly lower in the
treatments than in the control (Fig. 2A and C and Table 2),
as is the ratio between the two genes (Fig. 2E and
Table 2). The number of total heterotrophs is signifi-
cantly greater in the HCRN treatment than in the control
(Fig. 2D and Table 2). Differences in total heterotrophs
and alkane-degrading bacteria are not significantly
different from the control at p G 0.15 (Fig. 2B and D
Figure 1. Melt curves from the
alkB gene assay (A, B, D) and
rpoB gene assay (C). The product
is marked with an * and primer
dimers are marked PD. (A, B)
Occurrence of primer dimers
formed when the primer concentration
was high and the amount
of template DNA low or absent.
The temperature of denaturing
step in the real-time PCR protocol
was 94-C for (A) and 84-C for
(B). Variation in Tm for different
sample types is shown in a composite
figure in panel (D).
S.M. POWELL ET AL.: MICROBIAL ECOLOGY OF BIOREMEDIATION IN ANTARCTICA 527
and Table 2) for the LCRN treatment. However, the
SAB-degrading bacteria are significantly higher in both
the LCRN and HCRN than in the control (Fig. 2H).
The percentage of the bacterial population that is SABdegrading
is also higher (p G 0.15) in the HCRN treatment
than in the control (not shown).
The comparison between samples taken in 2000 and
2004 show that the total number of bacteria, measured via
both real-time PCR and MPN, has increased for the
control but has remained at about the same level for both
the LCRN and HCRN treatments. The number of copies
of the alkB gene g–1 soil, however, has decreased (significantly
for LCRN) in the two treatments but increased in
the control. No significant differences could be detected
between the 2000 and 2004 samples for the MPN of
alkane-degrading bacteria (Table 2). The ratio of alkB:
rpoB gene copy numbers is significantly less (Table 2) for
all three groups in the samples from 2004. The abundance
of SAB-degrading microorganisms (as determined
by MPN counts) has increased significantly for both
treatments but decreased in the control.
The concentrations of n-alkanes present in the field
trial samples in 2000 and 2004 are shown in Fig. 2G. In
the 2000 samples, the concentration of n-alkanes are
significantly lower in the two treatments; in the 2004
samples n-alkanes were only detectable in the control
samples. The concentration of n-alkanes remaining in the
soil is positively correlated (r
2 = 0.87) with the ratio of
the alkB:rpoB gene copy numbers.
Discussion
Real-Time PCR Assay Validation. At the time the alkB
primers were designed, there were only 20 sequences for
the alkane monooxygenase gene available in Genbank.
Even with this small number it was obvious that the
sequences were divergent and finding a suitable region
where primers could be placed approximately 100 bp
apart (optimal for real-time PCR) was difficult. For this
reason, some degenerate bases were incorporated in the
primers and this set was used to create a clone library
that allowed us to then design primers that would be
specific for our site.
The clone library constructed with the degenerate
primer set demonstrates that these primers are specific
for the alkane monooxygenase gene alkB. The non-alkB
sequences obtained did not return any significant similarities
from BLAST searches in GenBank. The presence
of these sequences may be attributable to the fact that the
system used (TOPO-TA from Invitrogen) recommended
not purifying the PCR product prior to the ligation step.
The Tm of the product of interest in both assays was
identified by correlating the size of the fragment on 2%
agarose gels with single peaks in melt curves. A peak was
observed in the melt curves from both the alkB and rpoB
gene assays that was identified as primer dimer. This is a
particular problem when using the SYBRGreen chemistry
as the SybrGreen dye produces a signal from any doublestranded
DNA, which can result in false positives or
elevated readings. To prevent the formation of the secondary
product with a higher Tm, the denaturing temperature
during the cycling steps was changed to 84-C or
88-C. This temperature was still high enough to denature
the product with the lower Tm but not the secondary
product (primer dimer) with the higher Tm, thereby
preventing it from being amplified. Another peak at 72-C
appeared in the negative controls (Fig. 1B) resulting in a
high signal for the negative controls. As suggested in the
Quantitect SYBRGreen PCR Handbook (Qiagen), by
adding a 15-s acquiring signal step at a higher temperature
at which the primer dimer has denatured (77-C in
this case), the signal due to primer dimer was removed as
SYBRgreen does not bind to denatured DNA.
Variations of approximately 3-C in the Tm were
observed for different samples in the alkB gene assay
(Fig. 1D). The theoretical Tm were calculated for a range
of sequences from GenBank (Table 1) and varied by
12-C. A similar phenomenon was observed by Stubner
[24], who concluded that the diversity of sequences
present in their samples resulted in melt curves with
broad flat peaks unlike the melt curves from the standards,
which had a single, sharp peak.
Table 2. Significant differences between microbial communities
2000 2004 2000–2004
LCRN HCRN LCRN HCRN Control LCRN HCRN
Copies alkB g–1 soil j 0.004 _ (0.98) , 0.004 , 0.001 j 0.001 , 0.007 _ (0.10)
Copies rpoB g–1 soil j 0.003 j 0.002 , 0.008 , 0.03 j 0.002 _ (0.29) _ (0.88)
alkB:rpoB _ (0.60) , 0.017 _ (0.66) , 0.004 , 0.024 , 0.002 , 0.011
Alkane degraders _ (0.24) _ (0.21) _ (0.53) _ (0.19) _ (0.20) _ (0.20) _ (0.19)
SAB degraders _ (0.24) _ (0.37) j 0.11 j 0.13 j 0.15 j 0.13 j 0.13
Total heterotrophs _ (0.49) _ (0.22) _ (0.49) _ (0.17) _ (0.34) _ (0.51) j 0.13
Comparisons are between the control and either the LCRN or HCRN treatments for the first two columns and between the 2000 and 2004 samples for the
last column. p values from Student’s t tests are shown.
j: significant increase; ,: significant decrease; _: not significantly different.
528 S.M. POWELL ET AL.: MICROBIAL ECOLOGY OF BIOREMEDIATION IN ANTARCTICA
Figure 2. Changes in the control (white boxes) and fertilized treatments LCRN (grey boxes) and HCRN (dark boxes). Copy numbers g–1 soil
of the alkB gene (A), rpoB gene (C), ratio of alkB:rpoB (E); most probable number count g–1 soil of alkane degraders (B), total heterotrophs
(D) and SAB degraders (H); alkane degraders as a percentage of total heterotrophs (F); and the concentration of the sum of n-alkanes mg
kg–1 soil (G). Bars indicate standard deviations.
S.M. POWELL ET AL.: MICROBIAL ECOLOGY OF BIOREMEDIATION IN ANTARCTICA 529
The limit of detection for the two assays described
here was defined in different ways. Although the rpoB gene
standard curve was linear to 1880 copies mL–1, the
negative control often had close to 5  103 copies mL–1
(Fig. 1C). As our samples always contained over 1  106
copies mL–1, this was not significant. However, we
defined the lower limit of detection as three times the
standard deviation of the negative control taken over
four different runs (2.7  103
), which resulted in the
lower limit for reliable quantification of the amount of
rpoB genes in a sample as 1  104 copies mL–1. Other
studies have also reported signal in the negative control
(e.g., [9]). We observed that the alkB standard curve was
linear down to 3 copies of alkB mL–1, but at this level
adhesion of DNA to tubes is likely to be a problem.
When serial dilutions of samples were run alongside a
standard curve, it was observed that the dilutions of the
samples were not linear below 200–300 copies mL–1 (data
not shown). For this reason, we would suggest that the
lower limit for reliable quantification for alkB is 300
copies mL–1. This is similar to other studies that have
reported detection limits of around 100 copies per PCR
reaction [9, 17].
The CV values from this study (based on concentrations
rather than CT values) compare well to those
calculated by Dionisi et al. [6]. In that study, the withinrun
CV was 17% (compared to 16% and 18% in our
assays) and the between-run CV was 37.5% (compared
to 25% and 38% in our assays). The high between-run
CV is partially attributable to the log-linear relationship
between the raw signal (CT) and the concentration values.
To minimize this effect we assayed all the samples, except
those that required repeating, in one run. Naturally, this
may not be practicable for large studies and caution
should be used when interpreting small differences
between groups.
Many factors—including the amount of sample used
for DNA extraction, the efficiency of the extractions, and
the presence of PCR inhibitors—affect the number of
copies of any genes measured in a sample. To avoid these
problems, the ratio of number of copies of the alkB gene
(specific to some bacteria) to the rpoB gene (present in
all bacteria) was used to look for changes in the microbial
population structure. This is analogous to the use of
a housekeeping gene in gene expression studies, and
indeed the 16S rRNA gene was previously used for this
purpose [5]. The proportion of alkB:rpoB genes observed
was high: between 50% and 600% (Fig. 2E). This is not a
reflection of the actual gene numbers in the samples, but
is more likely a result of the differences in amplification
efficiencies between the two assays. The average efficiency
of the rpoB assay (92%) was lower than the average ef-
ficiency of the alkB assay (95%). As the efficiency of each
assay was consistent, comparisons between samples are
still valid; however, the ratios between the alkB and rpoB
genes should be considered as indicative of the community
structure rather than absolute percentage values.
Although the variability of the MPN results made it
more difficult to detect significant differences between
groups, where differences were detected, they reflected
the same trends as the real-time PCR data. For example,
both methods suggest that addition of fertilizer to the
soil increased the total number of bacteria present (see
Fig. 2C and D).
Changes in the Microbial Community after
Fertilization. Various studies have shown that the addition
of fertilizer to hydrocarbon-contaminated soil
increases hydrocarbon degradation (e.g., [3, 7, 19]).
However, few studies have followed the microbial population
dynamics in any detail, often only showing an
increase in the number of total or hydrocarbon-degrading
bacteria. Here we show that there is a link between the
decrease in the amount of alkanes present with the
number of copies of alkB and changes in the microbial
community structure.
The sum of the n-alkanes remaining in each treatment
is shown in Fig. 2G. It is clear that fertilization has
stimulated the biodegradation of alkanes as 1 year after
the application of fertilizer, both treatments have
significantly less n-alkanes remaining than the control,
and the higher concentration of fertilizer has the least
remaining n-alkanes. After a further 4 years, n-alkanes
were only detectable in the control but the concentration
was significantly reduced from that in 2000. Although
some of the n-alkanes will have been lost through evaporation,
the increased loss in the fertilized treatments
compared to the control is attributable to increased
biodegradation.
Our data indicate that fertilization has stimulated the
total numbers of bacteria present in these soils as both the
rpoB real-time PCR and the total heterotrophic MPN
data show that in 2000, the treatments showed signifi-
cantly higher levels than the control. In addition, the
2004 samples are generally higher than the 2000 samples.
Fertilization had a more complex effect on the
hydrocarbon-degrading population. Initially, the fertilization
significantly increased the number of copies of alkB
g–1 soil: the LCRN samples from 2000 were significantly
higher than the control. However, by 2004 the control
had significantly more copies of alkB g–1 soil. Between
2000 and 2004, there has been a significant increase in
the number of copies of alkB g–1 soil in the control and
also a significant decrease in both the treatments. The
correlation between the number of copies of alkB g–1 soil
and the concentration of n-alkanes suggests that this is
probably because the control treatment is the only one
with n-alkanes remaining. Sei et al. [20] measured the
degradation of alkanes in seawater microcosms over
60 days and observed that an increase in the level of alk
530 S.M. POWELL ET AL.: MICROBIAL ECOLOGY OF BIOREMEDIATION IN ANTARCTICA
genes preceded the degradation of alkanes. This was
followed by a decrease in the level of alk genes after the
alkanes had been degraded in a manner similar to the
observations made in this study. In Fig. 2E, it can be seen
that the proportion of the population that carries the
alkB gene has decreased significantly in all treatments,
most particularly in the HCRN treatment 5 years after
the fertilizer was applied. In the 2000 samples (1 year
after application), the HCRN treatment has the smallest
proportion of alkB-containing organisms and also the
least amount of n-alkanes remaining.
The addition of fertilizer has most likely stimulated
the growth of bacteria that have an available carbon
source and are able to compete for the nutrients. After
1 year the HCRN treatment contained very low levels of
n-alkanes; the most easily utilized hydrocarbon source
has been depleted. The microbial community may have
been dominated by alkane degraders earlier in the year,
but by the time the samples were collected, the community
had already adapted to the use of other hydrocarbon
as a carbon source. This demonstrates the ability of microorganisms
to quickly respond to changing conditions
even in this environment, which is frozen for much of
the year. It would be interesting to follow the levels of
alkB over much smaller time intervals to gain a better
appreciation of the speed at which the microbial community
adapts.
Although there are no significant differences (p 9
0.15) between any groups in the alkane-degrading MPN
data, there are significantly more SAB-degrading bacteria
in the fertilized treatments than in the control in 2004
(Fig. 2H). This continued increase in the numbers of
SAB-degrading bacteria suggests that a population capable
of degrading nonalkane components of the diesel are
able to successfully compete for nutrients after the easily
degradable alkanes have been consumed and are now
increasing in number. In terms of overall bioremediation
of the site, this is very encouraging as the total petroleum
hydrocarbon content of the soil 5 years after the addition
of fertilizer is still approximately 2000–6000 mg kg–1 soil
in 2004 [18].
The fact that the proportion of alkB containing
microbes is highest in the treatments with the most nalkanes
present (r
2 = 0.87) also suggests that the alkane
monooxygenase pathway is important in the degradation
of n-alkanes in Antarctic soils. These genes have been
previously detected in both pristine and contaminated
Antarctic soils from areas distant from Casey Station
[15], and so would appear to be widespread in the
Antarctic terrestrial environment. However, this does not
mean that this is the only degradative pathway operating.
Work by van Beilen et al. [28] showed that cytochrome
P450 belonging to the CYP153 family could confer the
ability to degrade medium-chain length alkanes on
recombinant strains. Although hydrocarbon degradation
by anaerobic processes does occur in this soil [18], we
did not consider these processes in this study as they are
unlikely to contribute significantly to biodegradation in
the surface portion of the soil profile.
Conclusions
The examination of the microbial community in the
bioremediation field trial revealed that fertilization
stimulated the different groups of investigated bacteria.
Initially, the alkane-degrading bacteria are able to
dominate the hydrocarbon-degrading population, but
after the easily degraded alkanes have become scarce,
other bacteria able to utilize different hydrocarbons dominate
the population. This suggests that fertilization will
continue to promote biodegradation of the SAB diesel
even after the most easily degraded components have
disappeared.
In this study, we found that real-time PCR was
more reproducible, less labor-intensive, and quicker
than culture-based techniques once the assays had been
developed. Real-time PCR is an ideal technique for
ecological studies as a single DNA extract can be analyzed
for many genes, allowing a quantitative approach to
analyzing both community structure and function. However,
it is important that real-time PCR assays are tested
thoroughly for specificity and reproducibility and that the
limitations of the method are recognized.
