B43
Hybridization Analysis of Microbial DNA from Fuel
Oil–Contaminated and Noncontaminated Soil
C. Guo, W. Sun, J.B. Harsh, A. Ogram*
Department of Crop and Soil Sciences, Washington State University, Pullman, WA 99164-6420, USA
Received: 23 July 1996; Accepted 9 October 1996
A BSTRACT
The enrichment of several genes (xylE, nahAcd, todC1C2BA, tmoABCDE, alkB) that encode enzymes
responsible for key steps in the degradation of hydrocarbons, and one gene specific to rRNA group
I of the genus Pseudomonas, was studied in DNA extracted from a fuel oil–contaminated field site,
and in laboratory microcosms (with the exception of alkB). Toluene, ethylbenzene, xylene, and
naphthalene concentrations were related to the extent of hybridization of the genes in the field
studies. Significant differences were observed in the extent of hybridization of some of the genes
between contaminated and noncontaminated samples. In the microcosm studies, gasoline at rates
ranging from 0.5 mg to 125 mg gasoline/g of soil as applied to soils, and the changes in hybridization
intensity of these genes monitored with time. The lower threshold of gene enrichment of these genes
in response to gasoline addition was below 0.5 mg/g soil. Small increases were observed at the
0.5-mg exposure level, but hybridization intensity quickly decreased to levels below detection 6–8
days after addition of the gasoline. A dose-response effect was observed from treatments with
gasoline concentrations ranging from 0.5 to 35 mg/g soil. Inhibition by toxic components in
gasoline was observed at 75 and 125 mg/g soil levels. Hybridization of the Pseudomonas group 1
probe to field DNA was not significantly enriched in the contaminated field site, although these
sequences were enriched in the microcosm studies. Among the genes tested, xylE was the most
sensitive indicator of low levels of fuel oil contamination.
Introduction
Contamination of soils with petroleum products from leaking
underground storage tanks (LUSTs) is of concern at
many sites across the United States, and this contamination
may significantly affect the structure and functions of the
surrounding soil microbial communities. Petroleum products
such as gasoline and diesel fuel contain a variety of
components, some of which are highly toxic to microorganisms
and others of which may be used as sources of carbon
and energy by bacteria [2, 15, 19]. Microbial communities
typically adapt to contaminants such as petroleum products
*Permanent Address: Soil and Water Science Department, University of
Florida, Gainesville, FL 32611-0290, USA.
Correspondence to: Andrew Ogram; Fax: (352) 392-3902.
MICROBIAL
ECOLOGY
Microb Ecol (1997) 34:178–187
© 1997 Springer-Verlag New York Inc.
by enrichment of those microorganisms that are either resistant
to the toxic effects of the contaminant, or capable of
utilizing the contaminant as a nutrient source [2].
An understanding of the adaptation of microbial communities
to exposure to contaminants would be useful in
developing and evaluating biological indicators of stress experienced
by those communities. Such indicators would be
useful for a variety of applications, including identification
of levels of a contaminant required to affect a community,
and the rapid identification of soils that have been affected
by exposure to the contaminant. In addition, such an indicator
may be useful in assessing the content of remediation
of contaminated soils.
Increases in the total numbers of hydrocarbon-utilizing
microorganisms and of their relative proportions within microbial
communities are commonly observed in microbial
communities that have been exposed to petroleum contaminations
[13, 14, 20, 29]. The abundance of hydrocarbon
utilizers and the ratios of their numbers to total heterotrophs
have been considered to be useful indicators of hydrocarbon
contamination [2], although relatively few (possibly less
than 1%) soil bacteria are readily cultivable [32, 33]. Culture-based
indices such as these may be inefficient and biased.
An alternative approach to culture-based enumeration of
hydrocarbon utilizers is the application of gene probe technology
to measure concentrations of genes that encode enzymes
involved in the degradation of hydrocarbons within
total community DNA [9, 25]. Although hydrocarbon degraders
may be common in soils, background concentrations
of genes coding for the degradation of a specific compound
would be expected to be low relative to concentrations
in soils that have been subject to fuel oil contamination
[17, 24, 25]. Comparing the relative concentrations of genes
specific to degradation of the contaminant within total community
DNA extracted from exposed and unexposed communities
may provide a sensitive biological indicator of microbial
community adaptation.
The purpose of the work reported here was to determine
whether bacterial genes involved in the degradation of naphthalene
and toluene were enriched in soils contaminated
with gasoline and diesel fuel. These studies were also intended
to evaluate the use of catabolic gene probes as biological
indicators of exposure of soil microbial communities
to gasoline and diesel fuel contamination. Aromatic hydrocarbons
such as naphthalene and toluene are common fuel
oil components [3, 28], and the bacteria responsible for
degradation of these compounds are commonly present at
elevated concentrations at contaminated sites. Some of the
criteria for selection of probes are a knowledge of the biochemistry
and genetics of the target organisms, and the
genes should be conserved throughout evolution [16]. The
biochemistry of the degradation of naphthalene and toluene
has been well documented for many strains [1, 6 36], and
catabolic genes sharing high similarities have been found
among many strains capable of degrading naphthalene [21,
26, 36] and toluene [1]. Probes generated from these genes
would have a high probability of detecting genotypes [12,
25], and would therefore be useful in identifying the adaptation
of a community to fuel oil exposure.
For these studies, concentrations of selected genes, including
several involved in the degradation of benzene, toluene,
ethylbenzene, xylene (BTEX), and naphthalene, were
measured in subsurface soil samples collected along a gradient
of BTEX concentrations at a LUST site. These field
studies were compared with results obtained from microcosms
that were exposed to a range of gasoline concentrations.
Materials and Methods
Field Sampling
The selected field site was contaminated by petroleum products and
is located beneath Bridge 270/4 in Pullman, Washington. The soil
consists of sandy, gravely fill with coal fragments; over soft to stiff
silt; over loose to dense, sandy, angular gravel; over basalt bedrock.
A petroleum storage facility was at the site for more than 50 years,
and in recent years an above-ground tank had been constructed
after removal of an underground storage tank. Estimates of total
volume of impacted soil range from 5,000 to 6,000 cubic yards, and
concentrations of petroleum hydrocarbons range from 2,000 ppm
to less than 1 ppm [22]. Soil samples were taken in July 1992, from
15 boreholes at depths from 4 to 6 feet for most boreholes, and
from 4 to 11 feet for one borehole. Boreholes were 10 feet apart,
and covered both the contaminated area and soil adjacent to the
contaminated area. A total of 46 soil samples were collected along
two transects (Fig. 1). These two transects were chosen to include
contaminant concentrations ranging from very high to undetectable
contamination. Soil samples were placed on ice immediately
following collection and immediately transported to the laboratory
for strain isolation and storage at −20°C for later soil DNA extraction.
Microcosms
Surface soils (10–30 cm, silty loam) were collected from the campus
of Washington State University, Pullman, Washington. After parMolecular
Indicators of Adaptation 179
tial air drying, soils were sieved (2-mm-diameter openings) for
uniform consistency, and water was added to the soil to adjust the
moisture content to 70% of its water-holding capacity. Four hundred
grams of soil was mixed with unleaded gasoline (Chevron,
87[) at concentrations of 0.5, 5, 35, 75, or 125 mg fuel/g soil (in
triplicate). Each gram of unleaded gasoline contained 85.5 mg toluene,
19 mg ethylbenzene, 69.9 mg m-xylene, 26 mg o-xylene and
p-xylene, and 0.7 mg naphthalene, as analyzed by gas chromatography
(see below). The treated soil was placed into 2-liter beakers
in a layer approximately 3-cm thick. Soils without addition of fuel
were used as control samples. The beakers were covered with thin
polyethylene film (Saran Wrap) to reduce evaporation and were
stirred twice per week during room temperature incubation. Ten
grams of soil was taken from the beakers at 0, 0.5, 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 8,
and 16 weeks after inoculation and immediately stored at −20°C.
DNA was extracted at a later date.
Analysis of Aromatic Compounds
The total petroleum hydrocarbons were extracted from all soil
samples using a supercritical fluid extractor (Model SFXTM 2-10;
ISCO Inc., Lincoln, Neb.). The extraction conditions were modified
from the standard method [10, 12], as follows: pressure, 350 atm;
oven temperature, 80°C; restrictor temperature, 150°C; CO2, 60 ml;
collection solvent, 5 ml hexane; soil, 3 g fresh sample. The extraction
efficiency was determined to be approximately 65%, using
[
14C]naphthalene spiked into the soil prior to extraction.
Internal standards and reference standards from the Internal
Standard Mixture for EPA Methods 8240/CLP (Sigma Chemical
Co., St. Louis, MO) were added to the extractant. Aromatic compounds
(naphthalene, benzene, toluene, ethylbenzene, and xylenes)
were analyzed by gas chromatography using an Auto System GC
(Perkin Elmer Co., Norwalk, Conn.) with a 30-m (0.25-mm diameter)
fused-silica capillary column (Restek Co., Belletonte, Pa.). The
GC parameters were as follows: injection port, 250°C; flame ionization
detector, 250°C; column, 40°C, 1 min, programmed to
200°C with a rate of 8°C/min, hold 2 min; injection volume, 1 µl.
Extraction and Purification of Total Soil DNA
The method for extracting and purifying DNA from soil was a
modified method based on direct cell lysis [34, 35]. Extracellular
DNA was removed and the soil dispersed as follows: 1–5 g soil was
placed in 50-ml Oak Ridge tube containing 10 ml 0.12 M buffer
sodium phosphate, pH 8.0 (SP buffer), vortexed for 1 min, and
incubated for 10 min at room temperature. Soil was centrifuged for
10 min at 7,700 g. Supernatants were decanted and 10 ml SP buffer
was added to the soil pellet. The vortexing and centrifugation steps
were repeated once.
The soil pellet was resuspended in 8 ml lysis solution I (0.15 M
NaCl, 0.1 M EDTA, pH 8.0, 15 mg lysozyme/ml), mixed and incubated
at 37°C for 1 h with occasional gentle mixing. Eight milliliters
lysis solution II (0.1 M NaCl, 0.5 M Tris-HCl, pH 8.0, 10% SDS) was
added. The soil suspension was passed through three cycles of
freezing at −70°C for 20 min and thawing at 65°C for 20 min. The
supernatant was transferred after centrifugation for 10 min at 7,700
g, and 2.7 ml 5 M NaCl, 2.1 ml 10% CTAB (cetyl trimethylammonium
bromide in 0.7 M NaCl) were added into supernatant, mixed,
and incubated for 10 min at 65°C. An equal volume of
CHCl3:isoamyl alcohol (24:1) was added, mixed, and centrifuged
for 5 min at 3,000 g. The supernatant was transferred to a clean
tube.
An equal volume of 13% PEG (polyethylene glycol, 8,000 MW
in 1.6 M NaCl) was added to the supernatants, incubated on ice for
30 min or at 4°C overnight, and then centrifuged at 4°C for 10 min
at 12,000 g. The supernatants were decanted. The pellet was washed
with 5 ml 70% cold ethanol and air dried. The air-dried pellet was
resuspended in 750 µl TER (0.2 mg RNase/ml TE, where TE is 10
mM Tris, 1 mM EDTA, pH 8) and incubated for 30 min at 37°C.
Ammonium acetate (10 M; NH4OAc) was added to crude DNA
extracts, obtained above, to a final concentration of 2.5 M; the
mixture was put on ice for 1 h or at 4°C overnight, and centrifuged
for 15 min at full speed in an Eppendorf microcentrifuge. The
supernatant was transferred into another tube; the pellet was redissolved
in TE and 2.5 M NH4OAc and precipitated again. Two
volumes of ethanol was added to the supernatants, mixed, and
centrifuged for 30 min at full speed. The pellet was washed with 500
µl 70% cold ethanol, and air dried. The pellet was redissolved in
750 µl TE. DNA extract was passed through a Magic Minipreps
Column (Magic Minipreps DNA Purification System, Promega
Co., Madison, Wis.) following the manufacturer’s instructions.
Fifty milliliters of 80°C preheated TE was used to elute DNA from
the column.
Quantitation of Soil DNA
Concentrations of DAN solution were determined by using a DNA
fluorometer (Model TKO 100, Hoefer Scientific Instruments, San
Fig. 1. Map of field site. Stippled area represents zone of contamination;
numbers represent sites of boreholes from which
samples were taken.
180 C. Guo et al.
Francisco, Calif.) with bisbenzamide dye (Hoechest 33258, Sigma
Chemical Co.) in 1× TNE (10 mM Tris-HCl, 1 mM EDTA, 0.1 M
NaCl, pH 7.4) [18].
Traces of soil organic matter in soil DNA may result in overestimation
by binding to dye or underestimation by inhibiting
fluorescence. Concentrations of pure Escherichia coli genomic DNA
were underestimated fluorometrically when added to soil solution.
The interference of organic matter was successfully accounted for
by subtraction of DNase-digestible fluorescence (data not shown).
The interference of trace humic acid was accounted for by DNase
digestion (50 mg/ml, 25 mM MgCl2) at 37°C for 2 h. Concentrations
of soil DNA were determined in the range from 0.2 to 2.5 mg
DNA/g soil for samples from the Pullman soil site.
Hybridization
Soil DNA (0.5–1 µg) was denatured by boiling in 0.5 M NaOH for
10 min, chilling in ice, and then neutralizing by addition of onethird
volume of cold 3 M NH4OAC. The denatured DNA was
blotted onto a Nytran nylon membrane (Schleicher & Schuell,
Keene, N.H.) using a Bio-dot microfiltration apparatus (Bio-Rad
Laboratories, Richmond, Calif.). The membrane was baked for 2 h
at 80°C, in vacuum, before prehybridization.
The strains and genes used for probes in this study are listed in
Table 1. Dilution series of DNA from all gene probes were similarly
applied to these membranes. The dilution series corresponding to
the probe for a given hybridization served as a positive control and
quantitative standard for each hybridization, and the other standard
DNAs served as negative controls. Genomic DNA was isolated
from E. coli and Bradyrhizobium japonicum by standard methods
[23] and used as the negative controls for the group I Pseudomonas
probe.
Probes were prepared by digestion of plasmids with the appropriate
enzymes, followed by recovery of the inserts from agarose by
Gene Clean (Bio 101). Probes were labeled with 32P by random
priming (GIBCO-BRL; Grand Island, N.Y.), according to the vendor’s
instructions, to a specific activity of >108 cpm/µg.
The membrane was prehybridized at 42°C in 5× Denhardt’s
solution, 5× SSPE (Stock solution of 20× SSPE is 175.3 g NaCl, 27.6
g NaH2PO4 z H2O, 7.4 g EDTA per liter), 50% formamide, 1% SDS,
and 200 µg of denatured salmon sperm DNA per milliliter [23].
Hybridization was performed for at least 24 h at the same temperature
by adding denatured 32P-labeled probe. The membrane
was washed twice with 1× SSPE, 1% SDS for 15 min at 55°C, and
twice with 0.1 1× SSPE, 0.1% SDS for 15 min at 68°C. The washed
filters were exposed to preflashed X-ray film (Amersham, Arlington
Heights, Il.) at −70°C with a cassette (Halesy X-ray Products Inc.,
Brooklyn, N.Y. [23].
Autoradiographs were analyzed with a video camera (Model,
TM-TCN, Pulnix America Inc., Sunnyvale, Calif.) and NIH Image
1.52 program (National Institute of Health, Washington, D.C.).
Quantitations of the DNA sequences homologous to gene probes in
soil sample DNA were determined by using a regression equation
based on a range of masses of positive control DNA. The limit of
detection for all hybridizations was less than 1 pg positive control
DNA.
Results
Isolation of DNA and Hybridization of Catabolic Genes to Field
Soil Samples
No significant differences in amounts of total DNA recovered
were observed between contaminated and noncontaminated
samples (Table 2).
Hybridization data were expressed as mass equivalents of
the probes hybridized against themselves. This is not necessarily
equivalent to the masses of the target genes in the
samples due to the possibility of heterologous hybridization
with related, but different and unknown, genes. Expressing
the hybridization data in terms of massequivalents of the
target genes is a convenient means of comparing quantitative
differences in hybridization between different samples and
different genes. Stringencies of washing were maintained
high in all cases, and no cross-hybridization was observed
between any of the probes used in this study.
Hybridization data are presented in two ways: (1) the
mass equivalents per gram of soil (Table 2), and (2) the mass
equivalents per microgram of total DNA (Table 3). Normalization
of mass equivalents per gram of soil represents the
absolute concentration of the hybridization-positive sequences
in the soil, while normalization of mass equivalents
to the mass of total DNA is an indicator of enrichment of the
sequences within the community, regardless of whether the
Table 1. Gene probes
Genes used for probe Gene products or targets Original host strains References
nahAcd (2.1 kbp) Component of naphthalene dioxygenase Pseudomonas putida G7 27
xylE (2.2 kbp) Catechol 2,3-dioxygenase P. putida mt-2 30
todC1C2BA (4.0 kbp) Toluene dioxygenase P. putida F1 38
tmoABCDE (4.4 kbp) Toluene 4-monooxygenase P. mendocina KR1 37
alkB (500 bp) Alkane hydroxylase P. oleovorans 11
23S rDNA (360 bp) rRNA group I Pseudomonas group P. aeruginosa 7
Molecular Indicators of Adaptation 181
total community DNA decreases or increases as a result of
the contamination. In addition, expression as mass equivalents
per microgram of DNA eliminates variability due to
differences in DNA purification efficiency between samples.
Concentrations of mass equivalents per gram of soil are
presented in Table 2. Hybridization of tmo, nahAcd, and xylE
were significantly higher in the contaminated samples than
in the noncontaminated samples (P = 0.05) and hybridization
to the xylE probe was significant at the P = 0.01 level.
No significant difference in hybridization of the group I
Pseudomonas probe was noted between the contaminated
and the noncontaminated samples. The level of hybridization
was, in descending order, as follows: xylE > nahA >
tmoABCDE. No hybridization was observed with either
todC2C1BA or alkB.
Hybridization normalized per microgram total DNA is
presented in Table 3. Results were similar to those normalized
per gram of soil, with the exception of the nahA probe,
which was not significantly higher in the contaminated
samples at the (P = 0.05 level). The standard errors in the
nahA measurements were higher when normalized per microgram
DNA than when normalized per gram soil. This
relatively high variability probably resulted in a lack of significant
difference at the P = 0.05 level. It should be noted
that, in many cases, the standard error was higher when the
data were normalized per microgram DNA than when normalized
per gram of soil. This may be due to variability in
measurement of soil DNA by fluorometry.
Correlation Between Aromatic Residues and Catabolic Genes
No linear relationships were found between the concentrations
of these hydrocarbons and the genes tested (data not
shown), although a nonlinear relationship did appear to exist
between the summation of the concentrations of all of
these aromatic hydrocarbons and the extent of hybridization
of xylE (Fig. 2). Hybridization of xylE increased with increasing
aromatic concentration up to approximately 100 mg
aromatics/g soil. Above that concentration, the hybridization
of xylE generally decreased.
Microcosm Studies
In order to study the hybridization dynamics of these genes
in a well-controlled setting, gasoline was added at five difTable
3. Gene mass-equivalents concentrations as pg positive control DNA per µg total DNAa
Soil treatment
DNA recovered
(µg/g)
Group I
Pseudomonas nahAcd tmoABCDE xylE
Noncontaminatedb 0.56 (±0.06) 36.5 (±7.9) 1.61 (±2.49) 0.13 (±0.05) 9.5 (±3.0)
Contaminatedc 0.81 (±0.13) 34.8 (±7.8) 3.19 (±3.38) 0.38* (±0.09) 32.3** (±6.8)
* Significant difference at 0.05 level by ANOVA analysis between contaminated
and noncontaminated soil samples; ** significant difference at 0.01
level
a Significant hybridization was not detected with the alkB and todC1C2BA
probes
b Mean (± 1 standard error) based on 25 samples
c Mean (± 1 standard error) based on 21 samples
Table 2. Gene mass-equivalents concentrations as pg positive control DNA per g soila
Soil treatment
DNA recovered
(µg/g)
Group I
Pseudomonas nahAcd tmoABCDE xylE
Noncontaminated 0.56 (±0.06) 16.8 (±2.7) 0.81 (±0.23) 0.08 (±0.03) 5.4 (±1.7)
Contaminatedc 0.81 (±0.13) 23.6 (±4.9) 2.10* (±0.6) 0.40* (±0.13) 28.0** (±8.2)
* Significant difference at 0.05 level by ANOVA analysis between contaminated
and uncontaminated soil samples; ** significant difference at 0.01
level
a Significant hybridization was not detected with the alkB and todC1C2BA
probes
b Mean (± 1 standard error) based on 25 samples
c Mean (± 1 standard error) based on 21 samples
182 C. Guo et al.
ferent rates to soil microcosms. The concentrations of community
DNA remained constant across all incubation times
and treatments (data not shown). The concentrations of
total petroleum hydrocarbons and aromatic hydrocarbons
were not measured in the microcosm studies.
Sequences hybridizing to the nahA gene were enriched in
response to increasing concentrations of gasoline in the microcosms
(Fig. 3). Increases of mass-equivalent concentrations
on a microgram per gram-of-soil basis were observed
in all gasoline treatments. Maximum hybridization was observed
at 4 week’s incubation for the lowest gasoline concentration
(0.5 mg/g soil) and the intermediate gasoline
ranges (5, 35, and 75 mg/g soil) (Fig. 3). A cluster formed at
the maximum hybridization in the intermediate gasoline
treatments at 4 weeks, suggesting that the naphthalene utilizers
were limited by resources other than naphthalene in
the soil. At both the lowest and highest gasoline treatments,
the maximum concentrations were lower than those at the
intermediate gasoline ranges (Fig. 3). This may have resulted
from the inhibition of organisms containing the target sequences
by toxic components in the highest treatment, and
from the deficiency of C in the lowest hydrocarbon treatment.
The amount of hybridization decreased in all treatments
after 4 weeks’ incubation time. The amount of hybridization
at the lower gasoline treatments (0.5 and 5 mg
gasoline/g soil) returned to below the detection limit (1 pg/
µg DNA) by 8 weeks, and the two middle-range treatments
were at or below the detectable level. In contrast, hybridization
was maintained at relatively high levels at the higher
gasoline treatments (75 and 125 mg) at the 16-week incubation
time.
Among the genes involved in degradation of toluene and
its metabolites, a much higher level of hybridization was
observed with the xylE gene probe (Fig. 4) than with either
tmoABCDE or todC1C2BA (data not shown). The extent of
hybridization increased with increasing gasoline dosages for
the 0.5-, 5- and 35-mg/g treatments, and the maximum hybridization
occurred at 4 weeks for these treatments. A decreasing
trend was observed with increasing gasoline concentrations
at 75- and the 125-mg/g treatments at the
4-week incubation, indicating that there may have been increasing
inhibition at the higher dosages. This inhibition
may have been alleviated during the later timepoints due to
degradation and volatilization, as indicated by the rise in
hybridization at the later timepoints.
The tmoABCDE probe hybridized to a significantly lower
extent than did the xylE genes (data not shown). A doseresponse
effect at the lower gasoline dosages and a toxic
effect at the higher gasoline dosages were observed similar to
that with the xylE probe. Hybridization of the todC1C2BA
probe followed a similar trend to the tmoABCDE and xylE
probes, although todC1C2BA was higher at all dosages and
timepoints than the tmoABCDE gene (data not shown).
The trends of sequences hybridizing to the 23S rRNA of
group 1 Pseudomonas sp. were different than for the catabolic
genes (Fig. 5). There was no clear dose-response relationship
between hybridization and dosage until the 6-week
timepoint, and the highest amount of hybridization was observed
with the 125-mg treatment level at almost all timepoints.
The maximum hybridization was observed at the
Fig. 2. Relationship between concentrations of total aromatic
compounds (toluene, xylenes, and naphthalene) and hybridization
with xylE. Fig. 3. Microcosm DNA hybridization with nahA gene probe.
Various rates of gasoline (from 0 to 125 mg gasoline/g soil) were
added to 500 g soil. Extent of hybridization is represented as pgpositive
control DNA per µg total DNA. Error bars represent ± 1
standard deviation based on three replicates.
Molecular Indicators of Adaptation 183
4-week incubation time and decreased to a stable level at 8
weeks.
The alkB probe was not included in the battery of probes
used in the microcosm studies.
Discussion
We used a battery of gene probes in conjunction with direct
DNA extraction from soil to monitor changes occurring in
soil microbial communities exposed to petroleum contamination
in field and microcosm studies. Several genes were
selected as probes on the basis of their encoded enzyme
activities involved in catabolism of common fuel oil components
such as BTEX compounds, naphthalene, and alkanes.
One gene fragment was chosen as an indicator of the
presence of rRNA group I Pseudomonas species, a group of
bacteria frequently associated with the degradation of aromatic
compounds. The field site chosen for these studies had
a history of hydrocarbon exposure due to leaking underground
storage tanks, dating back to the turn of the century.
As expected, samples taken from soils contaminated with
fuel oil (as determined by analysis of toluene, xylenes, ethylbenzene,
and naphthalene by gas chromatography) were
significantly enriched in several of the bacterial genes that
encode enzymes that catabolize these compounds. DNA
from the contaminated samples was significantly enriched in
most of these genes, relative to DNA from the noncontaminated
site. The highest level of significance (P = 0.01) between
contaminated and noncontaminated soils was observed
with xylE, which encodes catechol-2,3-dioxygenase
from the TOL plasmid, pWW0. The pathway encoded by
pWW0 attacks xylenes, which were a major component of
the gasoline present in these soils. The absence of hybridization
of any samples with the alkB gene was somewhat
surprising, since alkanes make up a significant proportion of
gasoline hydrocarbons, but it is not unprecedented. Berthelet
and Greer [4] studied samples taken from 35 sites contaminated
with fuel oil and found that approximately 33%
of these sites did not yield amplification products with PCR
primers directed toward this gene.
The observation that most of the catabolic genes used in
this study hybridized to DNA from noncontaminated
samples was expected. These genes are likely to be widely
distributed in soils and may be involved in the utilization of
similar aromatic compounds released from soil organic matter.
The fact that they are enriched in the contaminated sites
is reflective of the higher concentrations of the primary substrates
present in the contaminated sites.
A linear relationship was not observed between the extent
of hybridization of the catabolic genes and the concentrations
of the measured aromatic hydrocarbons detected (for
example, see Fig. 2) at all concentrations in the field studies.
A linear increase between the concentrations of the measured
aromatics and hybridization of xylE existed up to approximately
100 µg/g, but hybridization rapidly decreased as
a function of aromatic compound concentration above this
level. Short-chain hydrocarbons present in gasoline are toxic
Fig. 5. Microcosm DNA hybridization with group I Pseudomonas
probe. Various amounts of gasoline (from 0 to 125 mg gasoline/g
soil) were added to 500 g soil. Extent of hybridization is represented
as pg-positive control DNA per µg total DNA. Error bars represent
± 1 standard deviation based on three replicates.
Fig. 4. Microcosm DNA hybridization with xylE gene probe.
Various rates of gasoline (from 0 to 125 mg gasoline/g soil) were
added to 500 g soil. Extent of hybridization is represented as pgpositive
control DNA per µg total DNA. Error bars represent ± 1
standard deviation based on three replicates.
184 C. Guo et al.
to microorganism [2], and it is likely that this toxicity inhibited
the hosts of these genes at high concentrations. Inhibition
was also observed in the microcosm studies at the
higher concentrations (greater than 75 mg gasoline added
per gram of soil). In our study, 75 mg gasoline used in the
microcosms contained 197.7 µg aromatic hydrocarbons/g
gasoline. This corresponds to 14,827.5 µg of the measured
aromatics added per gram of soil, or over 100 times the level
observed for inhibition in the field studies. A number of
factors may explain this difference, including the following:
(1) the field site was very old, and it is likely that simple
aromatics had been degraded to a greater extent than the
more toxic short-chain alkanes over the long period of contamination;
(2) the composition of the gasoline applied to
the microcosms was probably different from that released at
the field site; and (3) the microcosms were an open system
and therefore subject to volatilization. We did not monitor
loss of the gasoline throughout the course of the experiment,
and it is likely that the concentration of gasoline components
decreased soon after application, due to volatilization.
A range of concentrations of gasoline were applied to the
microcosms in hopes of determining the lowest amount of
gasoline required for observation of a significant increase in
the hybridization of the gene probes. The lowest concentration
used in these experiments was 0.5 mg gasoline/g soil,
and a measurable increase in hybridization to all catabolic
genes (except alkB, which was not included in the microcosm
studies) was observed at this level. Hybridization intensity
of all catabolic genes had either returned to background
levels, or was approaching background levels, following
16 weeks’ incubation of the 0.5, 5, and 35 mg
gasoline/g treatments. No toluene, xylenes, or naphthalene
were detected in any treatment at the 16-week sampling. It is
likely that all of the aromatic compounds utilized as nutrient
sources for these organisms had either been degraded or
volatilized before the 16-week time point. In contrast, hybridization
in the 75- and 125-mg/g treatments were at their
highest levels at the 16-week timepoint, suggesting that the
growth of the hosts of these genes was probably inhibited at
the higher concentrations until the toxins were either degraded
or volatilized. Then, these organisms would have
responded to the added carbon sources. Since none of the
primary substrates of these genes were detected at the 16-
week timepoint in these studies, it is likely that the levels of
hybridization in these treatments would approach background
levels if the experiment had been extended several
weeks. This is in contrast to what was observed at the field
site, where no significant difference was observed in the
hybridization of this probe between the contaminated and
the noncontaminated sites. The reason for this difference is
unknown at this time.
The trend of hybridization to the group I Pseudomonas
probe was fundamentally different from that observed with
the catabolic probes in the microcosm studies. No apparent
inhibition was observed in the higher gasoline concentrations,
and no significant enrichment was observed for the
0.5-mg/g treatment. A clear dose-response relationship was
observed by the 8-week sampling; hybridization increased
with increasing gasoline additions. This trend remained
through the 16-week timepoint. These bacteria were of interest
due to their importance in the degradation of aromatic
hydrocarbons, and many of the genes used in this study were
originally cloned from members of the rRNA group I Pseudomonas
sp. These data suggest that group I Pseudomonas sp.
that harbor genes that do not hybridize with the catabolic
probes used in this study are present in this soil, and that the
majority of these strains are less sensitive to high concentrations
of gasoline than are the hosts of the probes used
here. The rapid and significant increase in hybridization
with these probes (except in the 0.5-mg/g treatment) suggests
that these strains are utilizing gasoline components as
a nutrient source, and that the genetic systems harbored by
these organisms may be important in the remediation of
high levels of gasoline contamination that would inhibit the
hosts of the probes used in this study.
There are a number of criteria by which a suitable indicator
of community adaptation to a contaminant might be
judged, including (1) the sensitivity of the indicator to small
amounts of the contaminant; (2) the ease in distinguishing
background levels of the indicator from levels associated
with the contaminant; (3) the return of the indicator to
background levels soon after the removal of the contaminant;
and (4) the generality of the indicator in a variety of
soils. This work has shown that sequences hybridizing to
xylE are sensitive indicators of contamination and the adaptation
of soil microbial communities to exposure to low
levels of gasoline contamination. The microcosm studies
were in agreement with the field studies for this probe and
indicated that levels of 0.5 mg gasoline/g were sufficient to
enrich soil communities in these sequences. This enrichment
did not persist in the microcosms for long periods of time
following the disappearance of aromatic hydrocarbons, indicating
that these sequences return to background levels
soon after the gasoline has been removed. Hybridization of
sequences to this gene may be a useful indicator of the extent
of remediation of a gasoline contaminated site.
Molecular Indicators of Adaptation 185
The xylE probe was not a sensitive indicator of high levels
of contamination, however, due to the probable inhibition
of the hosts of these sequences at higher concentrations of
gasoline. The group I Pseudomonas probe was more sensitive
at the higher hydrocarbon concentration treatments in the
microcosm studies, although this was not true of the field
site. This discrepancy may indicate that there are unknown
ecological factors not related to gasoline contamination that
affect the concentrations of these sequences, and this probe
is less likely to be a reliable general indicator of contamination
than the xylE probe.
