B45
Anaerobic biodegradation of BTEX and gasoline in various aquatic
sediments
Craig D. Phelps & L.Y. Young∗
Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey, New Brunswick, NJ, USA (∗author for correspondence)
Accepted 16 September 1998
Key words: anaerobic, biodegradation, BTEX, gasoline, hydrocarbons
Abstract
We examined the extent of biodegradation of benzene, toluene, ethylbenzene and the three isomers of xylene
(BTEX) as a mixture and from gasoline in four different sediments: the New York/New Jersey Harbor estuary
(polluted); Tuckerton, N.J. (pristine); Onondaga Lake, N.Y. (polluted) and Blue Mtn. Lake, N.Y. (pristine). Enrichment
cultures were established with each sediment using denitrifying, sulfidogenic, methanogenic and iron
reducing media, as well as site water. BTEX loss, as measured by GC-FID, was extensive in the sediments which
had a long history of pollution, with all compounds being utilized within 21–91 days in the most active cultures, and
was very slight or non-existent in the pristine sediments. Also, the pattern of loss was different under the various
reducing conditions within each sediment and between sediments. For example benzene loss was only observed in
sulfidogenic cultures from the NY/NJ Harbor sediments while toluene was degraded under all redox conditions.
The loss of BTEX was correlated to the reduction of the various electron acceptors. In cultures amended with
gasoline the degradation was much slower and incomplete. These results show that the fate of the different BTEX
components in anoxic sediments is dependent on the prevailing redox conditions as well as on the characteristics
and pollution history of the sediment.
Introduction
The monoaromatic hydrocarbons: benzene, ethylbenzene,
toluene and o-, m-, and p-xylene (BTEX) are
constituents of petroleum and its products such as
gasoline and diesel fuel. Because they have a relatively
high water solubility, these chemicals readily
travel from spills or leaking storage tanks into groundwater
and from there into drinking water supplies.
Benzene is of particular concern as a pollutant because
of its carcinogenicity (Dean 1985). The others
are toxic to varying degrees. BTEX also moves easily
into sediments and other environments where oxygen
is limited. In these anoxic environments, bacteria
may use nitrate, iron, sulfate or carbonate as an electron
acceptor while degrading organic compounds,
but these ions cannot take the place of oxygen as a
reactant in aromatic ring cleavage. Because of this,
bacteria have had to evolve novel pathways for anaerobic
ring cleavage (Harwood & Gibson 1997). The
BTEX compounds are especially difficult to degrade
because they lack an activating oxygen or nitrogen
substituent group which would make oxidation of the
ring more energetically feasible. Although biodegradation
of these hydrocarbons has been conclusively
shown to occur under several anaerobic conditions,
information regarding the extent of this activity, or the
conditions that encourage it is limited.
The capability of bacteria to anaerobically biodegrade
BTEX has been clearly demonstrated. several
pure strains of bacteria which mineralize toluene under
denitrifying, sulfidogenic or iron-reducing conditions
have been isolated (for a review see Frazer et
al. 1995), as have denitrifyers which degrade ethylbenzene
(Ball et al. 1996; Rabus & Widdel 1995) and
m-xylene (Dolfing et al. 1990; Hess et al. 1997; Rabus
& Widdel 1995). The mineralization of various isomers
of xylene also occurs under denitrifying (Ball
& Reinhard 1996 [p, m, o]; Bregnard et al. 1996
[p, m, o]; Evans et al. 1991 [m]; Haner et al. 1995
16
[p, m]; Hutchins et al. 1991 (p, m], 1991b (p, m],
1992 [p, m]; Kao & Borden 1997 [m]; Kuhn et al.
1985 [p, m], 1988 [m]; Zeyer et al. 1986 [m]) as
well as sulfate-reducing (Ball & Reinhard 1996 [p,
m, o]; Edwards et al. 1992 [p, m, o]; Haag et al.
1991 [p]; Rabus et al. 1996 [m, o]; Reinhard et al.
1997 [p, m, o]) and methanogenic (Edwards & GrbicGalic
1994 [o]; Wilson et al. 1986 [o]) conditions.
Recently benzene degradation has been demonstrated
under iron-reducing (Kazumi et al. 1997; Lovley et
al. 1994, 1996), sulfidogenic (Edwards & Grbic-Galic,
1992; Kazumi et al. 1997; Lovley et al. 1995; Phelps
et al. 1996) and methanogenic conditions (Kazumi et
al. 1997).
Although this activity has been clearly demonstrated,
it has generally been found only in highly
polluted areas. Most studies have focused on a single
polluted site such as a heavily trafficked harbor or
an aquifer which has a history of chronic spills. Few
studies have examined the variability in biodegradative
capacity between different sites under different
reducing conditions. Kao & Borden (1997) looked at
BTEX degradation in several aquifer sediments, both
polluted and clean, in denitrifying microcosms. They
found that some inocula resulted in loss of toluene,
ethylbenzene, m-xylene and o-xylene, whereas others
showed no or reduced activity. Variation within a site,
depending on the terminal electron acceptor provided
was studied by Ball & Reinhard (1996) and Reinhard
et al. (1997) at a gasoline contaminated aquifer. BTEX
loss was observed under denitrifying and sulfidogenic
conditions. Differences were seen in both patterns and
rates of degradation.
Benzene mineralization, in particular, has proven
to be an elusive activity. Many researchers have reported
that benzene was recalcitrant when sulfate
was present (Ball & Reinhard 1996; Edwards et al.
1992; Langenhoff et al. 1996; Reinhard et al. 1997)
but others have demonstrated biodegradation under
these same conditions (Edwards & Grbic-Galic, 1992;
Kazumi et al. 1997; Lovley et al. 1995; Phelps et al.
1996). We were interested in finding out if there was a
difference in the degradation of BTEX in enrichment
cultures established under identical conditions using
different sediments as inocula.
It was our goal to determine if differences between
contaminated and pristine environments would have
an effect on the degradation of BTEX under different
anaerobic conditions. We aim to comprehensively
compare sediments from these environments in microcosms
using identical protocols, media and incubation
conditions in order to demonstrate the effects of the
different inocula and electron acceptors.
We established enrichment cultures using sediment
from four different sites, under five different reducing
conditions in order to examine the effect of sediment
characteristics and electron acceptors on BTEX
biodegradation. The four sites were chosen because
of their different histories of contamination and sediment
characteristics. Two marine sites, one polluted
(Arthur Kill) (AK) and the other pristine (Tuckerton)
(TKT) were compared to two freshwater sites, also
polluted (Onondaga Lake) (OL) and pristine (Blue
Mtn. Lake) (BML). The Arthur Kill is part of the
New York/New Jersey Harbor Estuary and is characterized
by a long history of industrial development
and pollution. Petroleum and other hazardous chemicals
are frequently released into its waters (Brosnan &
O’Shea 1993; Gunster et al. 1993; Holliday & Klein
1993). Similarly, Onondaga Lake, N.Y. has been the
subject of industrial inputs, including mercury, petroleum,
PCB’s and other chlorinated compounds since
the late 1800’s (Effler & Harnett 1996; Perkins & Romanowicz
1996). In contrast, the other sites are both
considered to be free from gross anthropogenic impacts.
The Tuckerton site is an unpolluted site (Gary
Taghon, personal communication), located on the continental
shelf off the coast of an undeveloped part
of southern New Jersey. Blue Mtn. Lake is an oligotrophic
lake located within the boundaries of the
Adirondack Park (New York), and has low annual inputs
of nutrients or other pollutants (Martin & Hyde
1995).
Materials and methods
Sediment characterization
Inocula for the enrichment cultures were collected
from four different sites. All samples were taken from
the top 20 cm of sediment. At the two polluted sites
(AK and OL), this material was highly anaerobic,
in the others (BML and TKT) the samples quickly
became anoxic during storage. AK sediment was collected
in ∼5 m of water using a coring device. OL was
sampled using a Ponar dredge at a depth of ∼19 m.
Surface sediments at the other sites (BML and TKT)
were collected with simple scoops. Water from the site
of collection was also sampled at each location. All
sediments and site water were stored in sealed jars at
4 ◦C until needed. In addition to the pollution history,
17
these sites also differed in the amount of organic matter
and nutrients present in their sediments (Table 1).
Sediment characterization was performed by the Soil
testing Laboratory – New Jersey Agricultural Experiment
Station using standard soil testing methods. The
concentration of several ions in the site collected water
were analyzed using ion chromatography.
Enrichment conditions
All enrichment cultures were set up as a 10%
(vol./vol.) sediment slurry in defined mineral media,
or in water collected at the site. The defined medium
contained the following salts (in grams per liter): KCl,
1.30; KH2PO4, 0.20; NaCl, 1.17; NH4Cl, 0.50; CaCl2
· 2H2O, 0.10; MgCl2 · 6H2O, 0.41; and NaHCO3,
2.52 as well as 0.1 ml trace salts, 1 ml vitamins and
resazurin as a redox indicator. The trace metal supplement
was composed of the following (in grams per
liter): H3BO3, 0.062; MnCl · 4H2O, 0.098; FeCl2
· 4H2O 1.49; CoCl2 · 6H2O, 0.119; NiCl2 · 6H2O,
0.237; CuCl2, 0.134; and ZnCl2, 0.068. The vitamin
supplement contained (in milligrams per liter): biotin,
20; folic acid, 20; pyridoxine HCl, 100; riboflavin,
50; thiamin, 50; nicotinic acid, 50; pantothenic acid,
50; cyanocobalamin, 1; p-aminobenzoic acid, 50; and
thiotic acid, 50. The medium used for the AK and TKT
enrichments contained 23 g NaCl and 1.0 g MgCl2 ·
6H2O per liter to approximate the salinity of sea water.
In addition the methanogenic medium contained
0.4 g/l of FeCl2 · 4H2O and 1.0 ml of 2.1 M Na2S ·
9H2O as a reducing agent. The iron-reducing medium
contained a slurry of amorphous FeOOH (∼200 mM
Fe(III)) formed by the reaction of FeCl3 with NaOH.
Denitrifying cultures were amended with 3.03 g/l of
KNO3 (30 mM), and 2.84 g/l of Na2SO4 (20 mM) was
added to the sulfidogenic medium along with 0.7 ml of
2.1M Na2S · 9H2O.
The sediment slurries were dispensed in 50 ml
aliquots into 60 ml serum bottles under an atmosphere
of 70% N2/30% CO2 (methanogenic and sulfidogenic)
or Argon (denitrifying, iron-reducing and site water).
Bottles were sealed with Teflon-coated, butyl rubber
stoppers (Emsco, Philadelphia, PA) and crimp sealed.
All enrichments were made in triplicate with duplicate
sterile controls. The sterile controls were autoclaved
three times on three consecutive days before initiation
of the experiment. In addition, duplicate background
controls were prepared in the same manner as the
experimental cultures except that no substrate was
added. These controls were used to account for electron
acceptor loss due to metabolism of endogenous
carbon in the sediment inoculum. The cultures were
incubated at 30 ◦C in the dark without shaking. Strict
anaerobic procedures were followed at all times.
Each of the cultures, except background controls,
was amended with a mixture of benzene, toluene,
ethylbenzene, o-, m, and p-xylene (BTEX) (Aldrich
Chemical Co., Milwaukee, WI) each at a concentration
of ∼100 µM. BTEX was added neat using a microliter
syringe. The BTEX compounds were the only
carbon and energy source added to the enrichments.
Enrichments used to compare the degradation of
BTEX to gasoline were set up in the same way using
site water as the medium and Arthur Kill sediment as
the inoculum in a 10% (vol./vol.) slurry under an Argon
headspace. The BTEX fed cultures received ∼100
µM of each compound, the gasoline cultures were fed
30 µl of commercial gasoline.
Analytical procedures
BTEX loss was monitored by withdrawing a 1 ml
sample of the slurry and extracting with 0.4 ml of
pentane containing 100 µM of fluorobenzene as an
internal standard. The extract was analyzed using a
Hewlett-Packard 5890 Series II gas chromatograph
equipped with a flame ionization detector (HewlettPackard,
Avondale, PA) and a 30 m × 0.32 mm
DBWax capillary column (J&W Scientific, Folsom,
CA).
Nitrate and sulfate were measured on a Dionex
model 100 ion chromatograph (Sunnyvale, CA)
equipped with an IonPac AS9-SC column and a conductivity
detector. The eluent was 2 mM Na2CO3,
0.75 mM NaHCO3 at a flow rate of 2 ml min−1.
Ions were quantitated by comparison with external
standards using a Chrome-Jet integrator (SpectraPhysics,
San Jose, CA). The production of methane
was checked by withdrawing a 0.25 ml sample of
the headspace gas with a gas-tight syringe (Precision
Sampling, Baton Rouge, La.) which had been flushed
with Argon, and analyzing it on a model 1200 gas
partitioner (Fisher Scientific, Pittsburgh, Pa.).
Results
BTEX degradation
The rate and pattern of BTEX degradation from our
enrichment cultures showed distinct differences between
the sediments used as the inoculum and the
18
Table 1. Characterization of sediments
% % Nutrients (ppm) Texture (%)
Sediment O.M. pH TKN P K Mg Ca Sand Silt Clay
Arthur Kill 14.6 7.6 0.54 0.1 84 151 248 49 46 5
Tuckerton 0.2 8.7 0.01 1.4 10 28 14 100 0
Onondaga 14.6 7.8 0.51 0.1 12 28 445 ND∗
Blue Mtn. 1.0 6.9 0.08 1.5 1 4 66 94 4 2
Site Water
mM
Site NO−
3 SO=
4 Cl−
Arthur Kill 0.05 8.2 164
Tuckerton u.d. 17.0 245
Onondaga 0.06 0.97 9.8
Blue Mtn. 0.03 0.07 1.0
∗ Sample was estimated to be less than 50% Sand and greater than 50% silt.
Analyses were performed by the Soil Testing Laboratory – New Jersey Agricultural Experiment
Station.
electron acceptors provided. The results are summarized
in Table 2. Degradation did not occur in any
of the cultures from the BML sediment, and only
one compound (toluene) was degraded in the TKT
cultures (site water) (data not shown). Both of these
sites are characterized by a lack of pollution history,
low organic matter content and relatively low nutrient
concentrations (Table 1). In contrast, BTEX loss was
extensive in cultures established from the heavily polluted,
high organic matter, Arthur Kill and Onondaga
Lake sites.
Activity was especially rapid in the nitrate
amended cultures of both polluted sites (AK and OL).
Toluene, m-xylene and ethylbenzene were all lost,
with no apparent lag, in both sets of enrichments (Figure
1A). However, no subsequent loss of the other
compounds was observed in the AK cultures, and only
p-xylene was lost (after a very long lag period) in the
OL cultures. The pattern of degradation was the same
in both sediments. Toluene, and m-xylene in OL, was
lost within the initial 21 days of incubation. These
were followed closely by ethylbenzene. There was
also a small (∼20–40%) decrease in the concentration
of o-xylene during the first three weeks, possibly due
to cometabolism.
In the sulfate amended enrichments, degradation
of BTEX began more slowly, but in the case of AK,
proceeded to completion for all six of the substrates
(Figure 1B). The same pattern was seen in the site
water cultures (Figure 1C) which were actively sul-
fidogenic. Toluene was degraded first, followed by oand
m-xylene, then p-xylene and ethylbenzene, and fi-
nally benzene. In the sulfate-reducing OL enrichments
(Figure 1B), only toluene and m-xylene were degraded
during the course of the experiment.
As expected, the only methanogenic cultures
which were active at degrading BTEX were those derived
from freshwater (OL) sediment (Figure 1D), this
includes the site water enrichment. toluene and ethylbenzene
were lost during the 161 day incubation.
When these same cultures were checked after 371
days, o-xylene loss was also seen (data not shown).
Iron-reducing cultures (Figure 1E) demonstrated
the ability to degrade toluene (AK and OL) and pxylene
(AK) or m-xylene and o-xylene (OL). There
was also some loss of ethylbenzene, m-xylene and
o-xylene in the AK enrichment but the results were
inconsistent.
Electron acceptor loss
The concentrations of nitrate and sulfate were measured
in the denitrifying and sulfidogenic (including
AK site water) cultures at the beginning and end of the
incubation. In those cultures where BTEX degradation
had taken place, the amount of electron acceptor loss
in fed cultures above that in un-fed backgrounds was
compared to the amount of loss that would be expected
if all the BTEX were mineralized to CO2. The results
are shown in Table 3. Values ranged from 73–75% of
expected for denitrifying cultures, and 88–186% for
sulfidogenic. Because of the small amount of substrate
utilized (from 6–21 µmol) and the large background
19
Table 2. Summary of BTEX degradation in different sediments
Benzene Toluene Ethylbenzene p-Xylene m-Xylene o-Xylene
Arthur Kill
NO−
3 − ++++++ +++++ − ++++++ −
SO=
4 + ++++++ ++ ++ +++ ++++
CO−
3 −−− − − −
Fe(III) − ++++ + ++ +/− +/−
Site water +++ ++++++ +++ +++ +++ ++++
Tuckerton
NO−
3 −−− − − −
SO=
4 −−− − − −
CO−
3 −−− − − −
Fe(III) −−− − − −
Site water − ++++ − −− −
Onondaga
NO−
3 − ++++++ ++++++ + ++++++ −
SO=
4 − ++++ − − ++ −
CO−
3 − ++++ + −− −
Fe(III) − ++++++ − − +++ ++
Site water − ++ − − − −
Blue Mtn.
NO−
3
b −−− − − −
SO=
4
b −−− − − −
CO−
3 −−− − − −
Fe(III) −−− − − −
Site water −−− − − −
++++++, loss within 21 days (avg. is less than 10% sterile controls).
+++++, loss within 35 days.
++++, loss within 63 days.
+++, loss within 91 days.
++, loss within 119 days.
+, loss within 161 days.
+/− loss in only 1 replicate after 161 days.
b Only 2 replicates available.
loss in some cultures, it is difficult to obtain good estimates
for these values. They are, however, in general
agreement with the hypothesis that the BTEX is being
mineralized rather than lost by some other process.
The presence of methane in the headspace of the
methanogenic enrichments, including OL site water
(data not shown), indicated that methanogenesis
was the terminal electron accepting process in these
cultures. Iron reduction was not measured.
Effects of gasoline
When commercial gasoline was used as the substrate,
degradation of BTEX was much slower and less complete
than when the BTEX was added alone (Figure
2). BTEX fed cultures showed complete loss of all six
compounds in less than 150 days. In contrast, gasoline
fed cultures showed only partial loss of toluene and the
three xylenes, and no loss of benzene or ethylbenzene
after nearly 300 days.
In order to determine which components of gasoline
were causing the inhibitory effect we established
enrichments containing toluene alone, BTEX, toluene
plus a mixture of C5-C11 alkanes, or gasoline, and following
the degradation of the toluene over time. The
concentration of toluene in each was approximately
equal. Results are shown in Figure 3. Complete loss
of toluene was observed within 28 days in the toluene
alone cultures, 42 days in BTEX cultures and 70 days
in toluene plus alkanes. Degradation was not signifi-
20
Figure 1. Loss of BTEX from anaerobic enrichment cultures. Each culture was fed a mixture of BTEX at a concentration of ∼100 µM for
each component. All data points are the average of triplicate bottles and are expressed as the ratio of the concentration in the active cultures to
the concentration in the sterile controls (Ca/Cs).
cant over the course of the experiment for the gasoline
cultures.
Discussion
Although previous research has demonstrated that individual
BTEX compounds are biodegradable under
anaerobic conditions, few investigators have studied
the differences between sites, or the effect that different
electron acceptors have on degradation. This
study is significant because we have tested the activity
from several sites in a side-by-side comparison
using the full range of BTEX components as substrates.
Enrichment conditions were identical except
21
Table 3. Utilization of electron acceptors
mM Nitrate loss BTEX NO3 loss % of
Culture Active bkgd. Net loss (mM) expected expected
Denitrifying
Arthur Kill 8.90 6.75 2.15 0.156 1.23 175 ± 35
Onondaga 13.05 11.05 2.00 0.341 2.73 73 ± 20
Sulfidogenic
mM Sulfate loss BTEX SO4 loss % of
Culture Active bkgd. Net loss (mM) expected expected
Arthur Kill 5.20 3.05 2.15 0.249 1.16 186 ± 12
Arthur Kill (site water) 6.00 3.90 2.10 0.425 1.97 107 ± 19
Onondaga 5.30 4.80 0.50 0.119 0.57 88 ± 0
The amount of nitrate or sulfate reduced in the active cultures was compared to the amount expected
if all BTEX lost was mineralized to CO2. The expected amounts of nitrate or sulfate loss
were calculated from the theoretical stoichiometric balance for mineralization of each substrate
and the amount of the substrate lost. For example, toluene under denitrifying conditions:
C7H8 + 7.2NO−
3 + 7.2H+ → 7CO2 + 3.6N2 + 7.6H2O
or under sulfidogenic conditions:
C7H8 +4.5SO=
4 + 9H+ → 7CO2 + 4.5H2S + 4H2O.
These individual values were then summed to find the expected nitrate or sulfate loss, which
was compared to the actual net loss in the active cultures.
for the inoculum and the electron acceptor provided.
This allows us to draw conclusions about the nature of
the microbial populations present and the potential for
bioremediation.
We have shown that there is a great deal of variability
in the fate of BTEX in anaerobic sediments, with
the rate and extent of loss depending on the inoculum
used and the terminal electron acceptor available.
While some enrichments resulted in complete loss
of all six compounds (e.g. AK-sulfidogenic), others
showed no activity at all (e.g. BML – all conditions).
Within each sediment, the activity was affected by
which electron acceptor was provided. Marine cultures
had robust activity under sulfidogenic conditions,
while only freshwater cultures were effective under
methanogenic. Both sets responded well to nitrate addition,
with rapid degradation of some compounds.
Furthermore, the degradation of BTEX was severely
limited by the presence of some, as yet unidentified,
compound or compounds in gasoline. This information
has duplications for the type of remediation
strategy to be used on BTEX spills in a specific area
depending on the type of material spilled, the pollution
history, and the sediment characteristics.
Hydrocarbon utilization was extensive in cultures
from the organic rich, polluted sites (AK and OL),
and very slight or lacking in the low carbon, pristine
sites (TKT and BML). Toluene in particular was
quickly degraded in cultures from both of the polluted
sites, under all reducing conditions tested (with
the exception of methanogenic cultures derived from
AK) (Table 1). Only one example of toluene degradation
was seen in one of the unpolluted sediments
(TKT- site water), however, and none of the other
aromatics was lost. The rapid utilization of toluene
under all reducing conditions is consistent with many
reports in the literature, including Ball & Reinhard
(1996), Barbaro et al (1992), Reinhard et al (1997)
and especially Langenhoff et al (1996) who showed
that in columns filled with mixed, polluted sediments,
toluene degradation took place under denitrifying,
sulfidogenic, methanogenic, iron-reducing,
and manganese-reducing conditions. There were no
organic-rich, unpolluted sediments or organic-poor,
polluted sediments included in this study, so it is not
possible to distinguish between the effects of these two
factors.
Differences in substrate utilization due to the available
electron acceptor were evident in both the AK
and OL enrichments. The most rapid loss of any compounds
occurred when nitrate was added as the terminal
electron acceptor, but the loss was most extensive
22
Figure 2. Comparison of BTEX degradation in enrichment cultures
containing gasoline or BTEX alone. Cultures were fed either 30 µl
of gasoline (for a final toluene concentration of 100–150 µM) or
a mixture of BTEX at a concentration of −100 µM for each component.
All data points are the average of triplicate bottles and are
expressed as the ratio of the concentration in the active cultures to
the concentration in the sterile controls (Ca/Cs).
Figure 3. Degradation of toluene in cultures amended with toluene
alone, BTEX, a mixture of C5–C11 alkanes, or gasoline. Error bars
represent ±1 standard deviation.
when sulfate was added. In the AK enrichments, only
toluene, m-xylene and ethylbenzene were degraded
when nitrate was provided. In contrast, when ferric
iron was added, m-xylene was not used but p-xylene
was, and when sulfate was present, all six compounds
including benzene were lost. Similarly, differences
were seen in the OL cultures. Toluene, ethylbenzene,
m-xylene and, after a long lag, p-xylene disappeared
under denitrifying conditions, only toluene and mxylene
were utilized under sulfidogenic conditions.
Iron-reducing activity was similar to denitrifying, with
the exception of o-xylene being degraded instead of
p-xylene. These differences are in contrast to the
results of Reinhard et al. (1997), who found that
at one site all of the BTEX compounds, with the
exception of benzene, were degraded under both denitrifying
and sulfidogenic conditions. The degradation
of toluene, ethylbenzene, m-xylene and sometimes
p-xylene, without loss of benzene or o-xylene, in
denitrifying enrichments has been reported numerous
times however (Hutchins et al. 1991, 1991b; Rabus &
Widdel 1995).
Interestingly, but not surprisingly, toluene was the
first compound to be lost in all cultures. toluene was
followed by ethylbenzene and m-xylene in denitrifying
cultures and o- and m-xylene in sulfidogenic
cultures (AK). Benzene was the last compound utilized.
Edwards et al. (1992) also found toluene and
m-xylene to be the preferred substrates when BTEX
was fed to a sulfate-reducing enrichment. They found,
in contrast to our results however, that o-xylene was
consumed after p-xylene.
In denitrifying cultures from both AK and OL there
is some evidence that o-xylene is being cometabolized
during toluene degradation. The concentration
of o-xylene decreased approximately 10% relative to
the sterile controls during the first three weeks of incubation
(when toluene degradation was occurring),
but did not change afterwards. In sub-cultures of the
AK enrichment, the addition of more toluene resulted
in a further decrease in o-xylene concentrations (data
not shown). This type of cometabolism was observed
by Evans et al. (1991) in enrichment cultures and,
later, in a pure culture of strain T1 (Evans et al.
1991b). The transformation of o-xylene in T1 was
tied to the production of 2-methyl-benzylsuccinate
by the enzymes responsible for toluene metabolism
(Evans et al. 1992). Apparent cometabolism has since
been reported in other studies of denitrifying systems
(Ball & Reinhard 1996; Kao & Borden 1997), and
the by-products have been isolated from contaminated
23
groundwater, where sulfate was the terminal electron
acceptor (Beller et al. 1995). Though cometabolism
cannot be completely excluded from these consortia,
o-xylene metabolism began only after toluene was
exhausted, suggesting that it was not the dominant
mechanism of degradation. It is significant that benzene 
 degradation was only observed in cultures from one site (AK), and only under sulfidogenic conditions. Benzene degradation has previously been shown to occur with sulfate as the terminal electron acceptor in four separate studies, one of which used the Arthur Kill as its sediment source (Kazumi et al. 1997). The other reports also
involved highly polluted source material (Edwards &
Grbic-Galic, 1992; Lovley et al. 1995) including an
area exposed to hydrothermally produced hydrocarbons
over a geological time scale (Phelps et al. 1996). Other researchers have noted a lack of degradation
in similar sediments under the same conditions (Ball
& Reinhard, 1996; Beller et al. 1992; Edwards et
al. 1992; Rabus et al. 1996; Reinhard et al. 1997). The lack of degradation is sometimes ascribed to
the preferential utilization of other carbon compounds
(Edwards & Grbic-Galic, 1992), an observation which is consistent with, but not proven by the observation
that benzene was the last compound to be degraded in
our experiments (see Figure 1B). Complete inhibition
of benzene utilization did not, however, occur in our
enrichments as it may have in other reports. It appears
that the ability to anaerobically degrade benzene is not
widespread throughout the environment, but can only
be found in certain sites with the right combination of
pollution history and environment.
The mineralization of benzene under iron-reducing
(Kazumi et al. 1997; Lovley et al. 1994; Lovley et
al. 1996) and methanogenic (Grbic-Galic & Vogel,
1987; Kazumi et al. 1997; Wilson et al. 1986) conditions
has also been reported, but was not observed
in this study. The concentrations of benzene used in
our enrichments was much higher than in the previous
iron-reducing reports, and the lag times in the methanogenic experiments was often longer than the length of our experiment, this may explain our lack of
success.
The relationship between the amount of electron
acceptor lost and the amount of BTEX degraded during
the course of the experiment (Table 3) supports the
hypothesis that these aromatic compounds are being
mineralized to carbon dioxide and water. The agreement
between expected and predicted values was best
in the AK-site water enrichment (107%), where the
largest amount of BTEX (0.425 mM) was lost in a
relatively short time (∼100 days). Ball & Reinhard
(1996) observed an excess of from 2.4–6.6 times the
amount of electron acceptor usage over what would
be required to mineralize the added BTEX in their microcosms.
This effect was accounted for in our study
by subtracting out the amount of nitrate and sulfate
reduced in un-fed controls. The values that we obtained
in these background controls (2.0–8.4 times)
is in good agreement with that they reported. The
amount of background utilization was especially high
in the denitrifying cultures, and this made it difficult
to obtain good estimates of the actual stoichiometry.
Degradation of BTEX was much slower and incomplete
in cultures amended with gasoline than when
BTEX alone was added. Other researchers have noticed
similar results when feeding gasoline (Barbaro
et al. 1992; Hutchins et al. 1991b). There are many
possible explanations for this effect. Although the concentrations
of BTEX were approximately the same,
the total amount of hydrocarbons in the gasoline fed
cultures was much higher. This may have led to a
general toxic solvent effect on the whole microbial
community leading to a longer lag time, or these other
hydrocarbons may have been degraded preferentially
over the aromatics. It is also possible that some other
component or additive in the gasoline exerted a selective
toxicity on the aromatic degraders. Because there
was no decrease in mineralization of the background
organic matter (as indicated by electron acceptor loss)
in gasoline amended cultures as compared to un-fed
controls (data not shown), it seems likely that the inhibitory
effect is not directed at the entire microbial
community. The results of an experiment where various
components of gasoline were added to cultures
along with toluene (Figure 3), however, show slower
rates of degradation in the presence of alkanes and
BTEX but that the inhibition of toluene degradation
can not be explained entirely by the presence of either.
There may be a synergistic effect between the different
components or some other, untested, compound may
be causing the lag. More work needs to be done to
determine the mechanism behind these observations.
We have shown that the fate of BTEX in anaerobic
sediments is dependent on characteristics of the
site, including its pollution history and the terminal
electron acceptor available. Furthermore, the degradation
of BTEX may be severely limited by the form
(alone or as a component of gasoline) in which it is
introduced to the site. This information leads to the
conclusion that bioremediation strategies must take
24
into account the previous history and other characteristics
of an area, as well as the type of material spilled,
if they hope to take advantage of native microbial communities.
