B49
Natural gas and temperature structured a microbial
community response to the Deepwater Horizon oil spill
Molly C. Redmond and David L. Valentine1
Department of Earth Science and Marine Science Institute, University of California, Santa Barbara, CA 93106
Edited by Paul G. Falkowski, Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey, New Brunswick, Brunswick, NJ, and approved September 7, 2011 (received for review
June 1, 2011)
Microbial communities present in the Gulf of Mexico rapidly
responded to the Deepwater Horizon oil spill. In deep water
plumes, these communities were initially dominated by members
of Oceanospirillales, Colwellia, and Cycloclasticus. None of these
groups were abundant in surface oil slick samples, and Colwellia
was much more abundant in oil-degrading enrichment cultures incubated
at 4 °C than at room temperature, suggesting that the
colder temperatures at plume depth favored the development of
these communities. These groups decreased in abundance after the
well was capped in July, but the addition of hydrocarbons in laboratory
incubations of deep waters from the Gulf of Mexico stimulated
Colwellia’s growth. Colwellia was the primary organism that
incorporated 13C from ethane and propane in stable isotope probing
experiments, and given its abundance in environmental samples
at the time that ethane and propane oxidation rates were high,
it is likely that Colwellia was active in ethane and propane oxidation
in situ. Colwellia also incorporated 13C benzene, and Colwellia’s
abundance in crude oil enrichments without natural gas suggests
that it has the ability to consume a wide range of hydrocarbon
compounds or their degradation products. However, the fact that
ethane and propane alone were capable of stimulating the growth
of Colwellia, and to a lesser extent, Oceanospirillales, suggests
that high natural gas content of this spill may have provided an
advantage to these organisms.
methane | biodegradation | marine bacteria | archaea | alkane
The explosion and sinking of the Deepwater Horizon in April
2010 caused one of the world’s largest marine oil spills, releasing
at least 4 million barrels of oil before the well was capped
in July 2010 (1). In addition to its size and duration, the Deepwater
Horizon spill was different from previous oil spills for two major
reasons, both of which are likely to influence the response of the
microbial community. First, the spill released not just oil, but large
amounts of natural gas (1, 2). The bacteria that typically consume
methane, the primary component of natural gas, have limited
abilities to consume multicarbon substrates (3), whereas many oil
degraders are capable of growth only on larger hydrocarbons (4),
and none are known to consume methane (5). The organisms that
consume ethane and propane, the other major components of
natural gas, remain largely unknown in marine environments, but
may include organisms related to methanotrophs or oil-degraders
(6). Second, because of the depth of the spill, nearly all of the gas
(2, 7, 8) and some components of the oil (9) remained in the deep
ocean, forming plumes of dissolved or dispersed hydrocarbons
between 1,000 and 1,200 m (10–12). The temperature at these
depths was just 4 °C to 6 °C, much colder than surface water.
Temperature has a direct effect on microbial physiology and an
effect on the physical properties of oil that influence its bioavailability;
both factors will influence the response of hydrocarbon-
degrading bacteria (13–15).
Crude oil is a complex mixture containing thousands of different
hydrocarbon compounds. These compounds differ in
solubility and volatility and are degraded at different rates; in
general, the smaller, less substituted hydrocarbons are degraded
faster than larger ones with more substituted groups (15, 16).
Although the ability to degrade hydrocarbons is found in many
types of bacteria, the most abundant oil-degraders in marine
environments are typically Gammaproteobacteria, particularly
organisms such as Alcanivorax, which primarily degrades alkanes,
or Cycloclasticus, which specializes in the degradation of aromatic
compounds (16). However, most studies of microbial
community response to hydrocarbons have been conducted in
oil-amended mesocosm experiments with sediment, beach sand,
or surface water (16), and little is known about the response to
oil inputs in the deep ocean or the impact of natural gas on these
communities. An initial report after the Deepwater Horizon spill
showed that, in late May, an uncultivated group of Oceanospirillales
were dominant in plume samples; 16 other groups of
Gammaproteobacteria were also enriched in plume vs. out-ofplume
samples (17). In June, plume samples were dominated by
two different groups of Gammaproteobacteria, Colwellia and
Cycloclasticus (2). The well was capped in mid-July, and by
September, these groups were much less abundant and plumes
were dominated by methylotrophs (Methylococcaceae, Methylophaga,
and Methylophilaceae), Flavobacteria, and Rhodobacterales
(18). Although the abundance of these taxa strongly suggests
they played a role in hydrocarbon degradation, it is not possible
to directly link any individual taxa to the degradation of a particular
type of hydrocarbon with only the environmental sequence
data. Here we present additional data on microbial
communities in environmental samples taken over the course of
the spill response, as well as the results of stable isotope probing
(SIP) experiments linking Colwellia to the oxidation of ethane,
propane, and benzene.
Results and Discussion
16S rRNA Clone Libraries from Environmental Samples. We collected
samples on three cruises, referred to as “May” (May 26 to June
5, 2010), “June” (June 11–21, 2010), and “September” (September
7–17, 2010). We sequenced bacterial 16S rRNA genes
from 29 deep samples and five surface samples; data from the
five June samples and seven of the 12 September samples were
previously published (2, 18), but we have since performed additional
sequencing on some of these samples, and results from
the full set of clone libraries are shown in Fig. 1. Deep water
samples (below 800 m) were classified as “plume” or “nonplume”
based on the presence or absence of a fluorescence
anomaly indicative of aromatic hydrocarbons (11, 18–20). Nonplume
samples were taken at plume depth within 5 km of a
Author contributions: M.C.R. and D.L.V. designed research, performed research, analyzed
data, and wrote the paper.
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
This article is a PNAS Direct Submission.
Data deposition: The sequences reported in this paper have been deposited in the Gen-
Bank database [accession nos. JN018421–JN018515 (SIP incubations), JN018516–JN018646
(archaea), JN018647–JN018743 (surface samples), and JN018744–JN019023 (deep water
samples)].
1To whom correspondence should be addressed. E-mail: valentine@geol.ucsb.edu.
This article contains supporting information online at www.pnas.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.
1073/pnas.1108756108/-/DCSupplemental.
20292–20297 | PNAS | December 11, 2012 | vol. 109 | no. 50 www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1108756108
plume sample or at a plume site, 200mabove or below peak plume
depth. Based on their proximity to plume samples, it is likely that
these sites were influenced by low concentrations of hydrocarbons
not detected fluorometrically and therefore should not be considered
true control sites, but as comparison sites with lower exposure
to hydrocarbons. Some plume samples also showed
decreases in dissolved oxygen concentration indicative of recent
respiration pulses. Oxygen anomalies, the difference between
measured concentrations and background values (18), expressed in
μmol/L, are shown in parentheses after the sample names in Fig. 1.
In all nine plume samples from the May cruise, the group of
uncultivated Oceanospirillales observed by Hazen et al. (17) (subsequently
referred to as DWH Oceanospirillales) accounted for
more than 30% of sequences (Fig. 1). DWH Oceanospirillales
accounted for more than 95% of sequences in five of those samples,
including one sample with no detectable oxygen depletion
(WS4-8). The remaining sequences from the May samples with
oxygen anomalies more than 2 μmol/L were affiliated with the
genus Cycloclasticus or the genus Colwellia. In the plume samples
with oxygen anomalies no greater than 2 μmol/L, the remaining
sequences were Cycloclasticus, Colwellia, or a mix of other Gammaproteobacteria,
Deltaproteobacteria, Alphaproteobacteria, Chloroflexi,
and the SAR406 clade similar to those observed in the
nonplume samples. Most sequences from the nonplume samples
appear to be “typical” deep sea bacteria, nearly all of them closely
related to sequences from the deep Arctic Ocean (21). However,
three of the four nonplume samples also contained DWH Oceanospirillales,
Cycloclasticus, or Colwellia, accounting for 13% to
42% of sequences. Without widespread sampling before the spill,
it is difficult to establish true background values for these groups,
but given that no sequences closely related to the DWH Oceanospirillales
were found in GenBank before the Deepwater Horizon
spill, it is highly unlikely that these bacteria are regularly that abundant.
Rather, these bacteria were likely responding to low concentrations
of hydrocarbons in these samples, or result from
extensive mixing of affected waters.
In contrast to the May samples, DWH Oceanospirillales were
not detected in four of the five plume samples from June. Instead,
Cycloclasticus and Colwellia accounted for more than 95%
of sequences. The one sample (H10) in which DWH Oceanospirillales
was detected was the closest sample to the wellhead
and the one with no detectable oxygen anomaly, suggesting it
had experienced the least biodegradation. Based on the observed
progression in these samples and the greater abundance of the
DWH Oceanospirillales in May, we suggest that the DWH Oceanospirillales
bloomed first, followed by Colwellia and Cycloclasticus,
although we lack definitive evidence because of the
difficulty determining time of exposure. Fluctuations in ocean
currents caused water near the wellhead to move away and then
return, so the distance from the wellhead does not necessarily
Fig. 1. Relative abundances in 16S rRNA gene clone libraries. Plume samples from were taken from 1,000 to 1,300 m at sites with a fluorescence anomaly
at that depth. Nonplume samples were from sites with no detectable fluorescence anomaly or from depths above or below the fluorescence anomaly (800–
1,300 m). Oxygen anomalies (μmol/L) are shown in parentheses after the sample numbers. The number of sequences in each clone library is shown in
Table S1 (average of 67 sequences per sample).
Redmond and Valentine PNAS | December 11, 2012 | vol. 109 | no. 50 | 20293
ENVIRONMENTAL
SCIENCES
SPECIAL FEATURE
correlate with the amount of time that water had been exposed
to hydrocarbons (20, 22). The oxygen anomaly is a better indication
of the amount of hydrocarbon degradation that has
occurred in a given water mass, but it should be noted that oxygen
concentrations never reached hypoxic levels, suggesting
that, to some extent, mixing was able to replenish oxygen in
plume samples (20). Microbial community composition appears
to be a much more sensitive indicator of hydrocarbon exposure
than oxygen depletion, given the abundance of these putative
hydrocarbon degraders in both May and June samples with no
detectable oxygen anomaly.
By September, oxygen anomalies could be traced several hundred
kilometers to the southwest, and methane, ethane, and propane
were lower than background concentrations for the Gulf of Mexico
(18). DWH Oceanospirillales and Colwellia were no longer detectable
in 11 of the 12 samples, but methanotrophs, other methylotrophs,
Flavobacteria (mostly affiliated with the genera Polaribacter
or Owenweeksia), and the Alphaproteobacteria order Rhodobacterales
were much more abundant than they had been in plume or
nonplume samples earlier in the summer. Flavobacteria in particular
were more abundant in plume samples than nonplume samples (10–
35% of sequences vs. 1–15%). Flavobacteria are abundant in the
ocean and are often associated with the degradation of high molecular
weight dissolved organic carbon compounds (23), but several
methanol-oxidizing strains of Flavobacterium have been isolated
(24) and they have often been observed in 13C-labeled DNA from
methane SIP studies (25). The Flavobacteria may therefore have
been secondary consumers of methane, oil, or cellular decay
products. The abundance of Flavobacteria may have been greater
than indicated by the clone libraries, as has been observed when
measured by techniques (e.g., FISH) that do not require PCR and
cloning (26–28). Terminal restriction fragment length polymorphism
(T-RFLP) analysis of these samples, which used the same
PCR primers, but did not require cloning, showed the Flavobacteria
accounted for as much as 56% of total peak area (Fig. S1A). Although
the relative abundances of all other groups of bacteria
corresponded well between clone libraries and T-RFLP, the Flavobacteria
were somewhat underrepresented in clone libraries (Fig.
S2), possibly because of biases associated with cloning (29).
We also sequenced archaeal 16S rRNA genes from six deep
water samples: plume/nonplume from May (WS41-8/WS41-12),
low oxygen anomaly plume/high oxygen anomaly plume from
June (H10/H24), and plume/nonplume from September (P203/
P230). These samples contained different bacterial communities
(WS41-12 and P203 showed relatively little hydrocarbon influence),
but the archaeal communities in all six samples were very
similar: more than 70% of sequences in each clone library were
from one OTU affiliated with the Marine Group II Euryarchaeota
(30), with the remainder related to other marine Euryarchaeota or
Thaumarchaeota (Fig. S3). The dominance of this OTU in all
samples suggests that the presence of hydrocarbons did not have
a large impact, although deeper sequencing of these samples
could possibly show an impact on less abundant members of the
community. Archaea have not been shown to play a significant
role in hydrocarbon degradation in aerobic marine environments,
and the effect of crude oil on archaea is not well understood.
Some evidence suggests that the presence of oil has a strong
negative influence on archaea, whereas other studies see little
effect (31). That archaea do not bloom in response to a sudden
input of oil is consistent with their hypothesized ecology (32).
In addition to deep water plume samples, we analyzed water
samples from five sites with surface oiling. The amount of oil at
these sites varied: three sites (WS6-S, WS47-S, and WS73-S) had
an oil sheen, whereas the other two contained a thicker coating of
oil. The three sheen samples were dominated by Cyanobacteria
and Alphaproteobacteria (SAR11 clade, Rhodobacterales, and
Rhodospirillales), with just 15% of sequences affiliated with possible
hydrocarbon degraders from the Alteromonadales and Oceanospirillales
(Fig. 1). Gammaproteobacteria were more abundant
in the more heavily oiled samples, accounting for 100% of
sequences in WS85-S (93% Pseudoalteromonas) and 48% of
sequences in WSV-S (Pseudomonas, Vibrio, Acinetobacter, and
Alteromonas). No DWH Oceanospirillales were detected in these
samples, and Colwellia and Cycloclasticus accounted for less than
5% of sequences in each sample.
Role of Temperature. The difference between surface slick and
deep water plume communities suggests that temperature may
have played a significant role in determining which members of the
microbial community responded to the Deepwater Horizon spill.
Most cultivated strains of Colwellia are psychrophiles (33), and
one of the cultivated organisms most closely related to the DWH
Oceanospirillales, Oleispira antarctica, is also psychrophilic (34).
Cycloclasticus has been shown to be abundant in oil-degrading
microcosms at both 4 °C and 20 °C (14). Although no cultivated
strain of Colwellia has been shown to oxidize hydrocarbons and it is
not commonly observed in oil degradation studies, several studies
have detected Colwellia in oil-contaminated ice cores or sediments
incubated at low temperatures (35, 36). To determine the impact
of temperature on oil-degrading communities, we added crude oil
to seawater collected from a deep water sample on the September
cruise and incubated in triplicate at 4 °C and room temperature
(∼20 °C) for 10 d. In 16S rRNA gene clone libraries from these
samples, Colwellia accounted for 87% of total clones when incubated
at 4 °C, but only 5% at room temperature (Fig. 2).
Alphaproteobacteria, predominantly Rhodobacteraceae closely related
to those abundant in plume samples from September (18),
accounted for 93% of clones at room temperature, but 13% at 4
°C. Neither Cycloclasticus nor DWH Oceanospirillales were
detected at either temperature.
SIP. To identify the bacteria consuming specific hydrocarbon compounds
abundant in the deep plume, we used SIP with 13C-labeled
methane, ethane, propane, or benzene. Seawater from site P222
from the September cruise was incubated for 10 d at 6 °C, and the
13C-labeled substrates were converted to 13C-labeled dissolved inorganic
carbon (DIC; Fig. 3A). 13C-labeled (i.e., “heavy”) and unlabeled
(i.e., “light”) DNA were then separated by CsCl density
gradient centrifugation. 16S rRNA gene clone libraries from the
heavy and light DNA and T-RFLP analysis of the unfractionated
DNA and selected gradient fractions showed that the addition of
these substrates led to changes in the microbial community (Fig. 3B
and Fig. S1B). Colwellia sequences were not detected in the initial
sample and were detected in only one of the 11 other September
samples, but were the most abundant group in the heavyDNAfrom
the ethane, propane, and benzene incubations (45–72% of
sequences) and were also abundant in the unlabeled DNA from all
Fig. 2. Relative abundances of 16S rRNA genes in clone libraries from crude
oil enrichment cultures incubated at 4 °C and room temperature (∼20 °C).
n = 20–24 sequences per sample, three samples for each temperature.
20294 | www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1108756108 Redmond and Valentine
four incubations. The DWH Oceanospirillales were also not
detected in any of the September samples, but accounted for 3%to
13%of sequences in the heavy and light DNA from the ethane and
propane incubations and light DNA from the methane incubation.
DWH Oceanospirillales were not detected in the heavy or light
DNA from the benzene incubations, whereas Actinobacteria
accounted for 15% of sequences in the benzene heavy DNA clone
libraries, but were not detected in any of the others. Heavy benzene
fractions and light ethane and propane fractions contained a number
of other Oceanospirillales sequences affiliated with the genus
Neptunomonas, closely related to the aromatic hydrocarbon degrader
Neptunomonas naphthovorans (37) and symbionts of boneeating
Osedax species (38).
Despite the abundance of methylotrophs in the initial seawater
(23% of sequences), methane was converted to [13C]DIC much
more slowly than the other substrates (Fig. 3A). This is consistent
with the low methane oxidation rates measured in September and
supports the hypothesis that the methylotrophs in the September
samples were metabolically inactive remnants of a bloom that had
peaked earlier in the summer (18). The majority of methylotrophs
in the initial sample were affiliated with Methylophaga or Methylophilaceae,
which are likely secondary consumers of C1 compounds
after Methylococcaceae oxidize methane to methanol. These processes
appear to be tightly coupled, but presumably require
Methylococcaceae to respond initially (6, 39). Methylococcaceae
accounted for only 3% of sequences in the initial sample, and they
appear to bloom more slowly in response to natural gas inputs than
ethane and propane oxidizers, just as observed earlier in the
summer (2). The low DNA concentrations in the heaviest fractions
necessitated the use of DNA from a slightly less dense fraction for
the heavy DNA clone library, but 84% of sequences in this fraction
were affiliated with the Methylococcaceae or Methylophaga, compared
with just 7% in the light fraction. These sequences, along
with Colwellia, DWH Oceanospirillales, and Actinobacteria, were
closely related to the sequences observed in the environmental
samples (Fig. 4).
Although SIP experiments typically try to mimic in situ conditions
and use low concentrations of substrate to avoid microbial
community changes over the course of the incubation, our goal
was to replicate the bloom conditions caused by hydrocarbon
inputs following the well blowout. Colwellia was able to respond
rapidly, becoming abundant in heavy and light DNA. To become
so abundant in the heavy DNA, Colwellia had to consume 13Clabeled
ethane, propane, or benzene, and then use that 13C in the
production of new DNA, a process which is typically associated
with cell division (39). The Colwellia sequences in the unlabeled
DNA were from organisms that were either consuming the 13C
substrate but had not yet synthesized a sufficient amount of DNA
with that labeled carbon or from organisms consuming an alternate
carbon source. Given that the cultivated strains of Colwellia
are capable of degrading many different carbon sources (33, 40),
either explanation is possible. It is also important to note that we
cannot exclude the possibility of cross-feeding (25, 39), whereby
one organism is responsible for the initial oxidation step (e.g.,
ethane to ethanol) and a different organism then consumes this
13C-labeled intermediate (e.g., ethanol) and incorporates it into
13C biomass. However, given the dominance of Colwellia in the
SIP samples and the high rates of ethane and propane oxidation in
June, when Colwellia sequences accounted for approximately 70%
of sequences in plume samples (2), it is likely that Colwellia was
responsible for the bulk of ethane and propane oxidation in situ,
although the SIP results show the DWH Oceanospirillales may
also have played a role.
Conclusions
The microbial community response to the Deepwater Horizon oil
spill was distinct from that observed in previous spills or mesocosm
studies. Deep water plume communities were dominated
by just three groups of Gammaproteobacteria in May and June,
none of which were abundant in surface oil samples. Two of
these groups, the DWH Oceanospirillales and Colwellia, are related
to known psychrophiles, and Colwellia was much more
abundant in crude oil enrichments at 4 °C than at room temperature,
suggesting that the temperature played a significant
role. The abundance of natural gas in the Deepwater Horizon spill
seemingly provided an advantage to Colwellia and the DWH
Oceanospirillales, as both these groups became more abundant
with the addition of ethane or propane alone. Colwellia was likely
responsible for the majority of ethane and propane oxidation,
but may also have been involved with the degradation of higher
molecular weight hydrocarbons.
Methods
Study Site and Sample Collection. Samples were collected on three cruises: R/V
Walton Smith (May 26 to June 5, 2010), R/V Cape Hatteras (June 11–21, 2010),
and National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration ship Pisces (September
A B
Fig. 3. (A) Conversion of 13C methane, ethane, propane, and benzene to [13C]DIC during SIP incubations of seawater at 6 °C. (B) Relative abundances in 16S
rRNA gene clone libraries from heavy (i.e., 13C-labeled) and light (i.e., unlabeled) DNA from SIP incubations with 13C methane, ethane, propane, and benzene,
and the initial seawater (sample P222). n = 75 (initial), n = 25 (heavy methane), n = 69 (light methane), n = 44 (heavy methane), n = 81 (light methane), n = 43
(heavy methane), n = 78 (light methane), n = 84 (heavy methane), and n = 76 (light benzene).
Redmond and Valentine PNAS | December 11, 2012 | vol. 109 | no. 50 | 20295
ENVIRONMENTAL
SCIENCES
SPECIAL FEATURE
7–17, 2010). Sample locations are shown on the map in Fig. S4 and listed with
additional details in Table S1. Dissolved oxygen concentrations were measured
with the SBE-43 dissolved oxygen sensors on the ships’ conductivity/
temperature/depth (CTD) rosettes and on select samples by Winkler titration,
as described previously (2). A 10th-degree polynomial was fit to the dissolved
oxygen-depth profiles to determine a background oxygen concentration, as
described previously (18). Oxygen anomalies were calculated as the difference
between the measured dissolved oxygen concentration and the background
concentration for a given depth. For the R/V Walton Smith cruise, oxygen
anomalies were calculated with the publically available CTD profile data (41).
Fluorescence was measured with a WETLabs ECO FL CDOM fluorometer (excitation
of 370 nm, emission of 460 nm) on the R/V Walton Smith and R/V Cape
Hatteras and with a Chelsea Technologies UV AquaTracka (excitation of 239
nm, emission of 360 nm) on the Pisces. Deep water samples were collected in
Niskin bottles on the ships’ CTD rosettes. One liter of seawater was filtered
onto a 0.2-μm Sterivex filter (Millipore) which was stored frozen until extraction.
Surface samples were collected only on the May cruise, by using
a plastic bucket. An oil/water mixture was collected from the surface of the
bucket sample into a 125-mL glass jar and stored frozen for several months.
Samples were then thawed and filtered onto 0.2-μm Sterivex filters (Millipore);
DNA was extracted from the filters as described later.
16S rRNA Clone Libraries. DNAwas extracted fromfilters with the FastDNASPIN
kit for soil (MP Biomedicals). Bacterial sequences were amplified with the
primers 27F and 1392R, as previously described (6), and archaeal sequences
were amplified with 21F and 958R (30). For each sample, duplicate PCR reactions
were performed, then pooled and cleaned with the Wizard SV Gel and
PCR Clean-Up kit (Promega). PCR products were cloned with the PCR Cloning
Kit (Qiagen), and randomly selected clones were selected for sequencing at
the University of California, Berkeley, DNA Sequencing Facility. Sequences
were edited and assembled with Sequencher (Gene Codes) and screened for
chimeras with Bellerophon (42) and Pintail (43). Additional chimeras were
detected by comparison with closely related sequences via BLAST searches
(44). In plume samples with two or three dominant sequences, as many as one
third of sequences were found to be chimeric; all suspected chimeras were
omitted from subsequent analysis. Sequences were assigned to operational
taxonomic units (OTUs) with MOTHUR (45), and each sequence was also
identified using the RDP Classifier tool (46). For bacteria, OTU clustering at the
3% difference threshold corresponded with the RDP taxonomy at the family
or genus level, with the exception of the SAR 406 clade. Representative
members of relevant OTUs were aligned with ClustalW, and MEGA4 (47) was
used to construct neighbor-joining phylogenetic trees (maximum composite
likelihood method, 1,000 bootstrap replicates). At least one sequence from
each OTU was submitted to GenBank under the accession numbers JN018421
to JN018515 (SIP incubations), JN018516 to JN018646 (archaea), JN018647 to
JN018743 (surface samples), and JN018744 to JN019023 (deep water samples).
Enrichment Cultures. Seawater was collected on the September cruise and
stored at 4 °C for 3 mo before starting enrichment cultures. Crude oil (0.5
mL) was added to 100 mL seawater and 50 mL artificial seawater in a 250-mL
sterile glass serum bottle, sealed with a Teflon-coated butyl rubber stopper
and an aluminum crimp seal. The artificial seawater contained, per liter, 20 g
NaCl, 3 g MgCl2·6 H2O, 4 g NaSO4, 0.15 g CaCl2·2 H2O, 0.5 g KCl, 0.2 g
NaHCO3, 0.85 g NaNO3, and 20 mL 0.5 M phosphate buffer (pH 7.4). Three
bottles were incubated at 4 °C and three at room temperature (∼20 °C) for
10 d. Each bottle was filtered onto a 0.2-μm Sterivex filter (Millipore); DNA
was extracted and clone libraries were constructed as described earlier.
SIP. Immediately after collection, seawater from sample P222 was incubated
with 99+% 13C methane, ethane, propane, or benzene (Isotec/Sigma Aldrich),
as well as 12C (natural abundance of 13C, ∼1.1%) controls for methane, ethane,
and propane (Airgas). For each incubation, 200 mL seawater was added to a
250-mL sterile glass serum bottle, sealed with a Teflon-coated butyl rubber
stopper and an aluminum crimp seal. Five milliliters of methane, ethane, or
propane, or 70 μmol benzene was added and samples were incubated at 6 °C
for 10 d. Ten milliliters of water was removed for [δ13C]DIC analysis, and the
remainder was filtered onto a 0.2-μm Sterivex filter (Millipore) and stored
frozen until DNA extraction. Replicate bottles for each substrate were also
harvested at 2 d and 3.5 d for [δ13C]DIC measurements; DNA from these
samples was not analyzed as a result of insufficient 13C uptake. Analysis of
[δ13C]DIC was performed as described previously (2), and DNA extraction as
described earlier. 12C and 13C DNA were separated by CsCl density gradient
centrifugation as described previously (6) and separated into 10 fractions. 16S
rRNA gene clone libraries were constructed fromDNAfromone heavy fraction
(1.74 g mL−1 for ethane, propane, and benzene; 1.72 g mL−1 for methane) and
one light fraction (1.69 gmL−1) fromeach 13C substrate. There was insufficient
DNA for analysis in the heavy fractions from the 12C controls. Cloning and
sequence analysis were performed as described earlier.
Fig. 4. Neighbor-joining tree showing phylogenetic relationships between
bacterial 16S rRNA gene sequences from the major groups of Gammaproteobacteria,
Alphaproteobacteria, and Actinobacteria in SIP samples
(bold), environmental samples from May, June, or September, and reference
sequences (GenBank accession numbers in parentheses). Filled circles indicate
nodes with bootstrap values greater than 90% (1,000 replicates);
open circles indicate bootstrap values greater than 50%.
20296 | www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1108756108 Redmond and Valentine
T-RFLP. T-RFLP analysis was performed on selected samples from the SIP
experiment and the September cruise. DNA was amplified as described
earlier, but with a 6-carboxyfluorescein–labeled forward primer. Cleaned
PCR product (100 ng) was digested with MspI, and samples were analyzed
with T-REX (48), as described previously (6). Terminal restriction fragments
(T-RFs) were identified by in silico digestion of all clone library sequences
from each batch of samples (SIP and September samples were analyzed
separately). Some T-RFs could be assigned to multiple groups (there was
significant overlap between the methanotrophs, methylotrophs, and some
other Gammaproteobacteria, and it was not possible to distinguish the
Deltaproteobacteria, Actinobacteria, and SAR406 clade from each other, but
the Flavobacteria, Alphaproteobacteria, and Gammaproteobacteria were
readily differentiated.
