B7
Microbial Communities Associated with Anaerobic Benzene
Degradation in a Petroleum-Contaminated Aquifer
JULIETTE N. ROONEY-VARGA,1† ROBERT T. ANDERSON,1 JOCELYN L. FRAGA,1‡ DAVID
RINGELBERG,2 AND DEREK R. LOVLEY1*
Department of Microbiology, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, Massachusetts 01003,1 and Waterways Experiment
Station, Dyntel Corp., Vicksburg, Mississippi 391802
Received 15 December 1998/Accepted 19 April 1999
Microbial community composition associated with benzene oxidation under in situ Fe(III)-reducing conditions
in a petroleum-contaminated aquifer located in Bemidji, Minn., was investigated. Community structure
associated with benzene degradation was compared to sediment communities that did not anaerobically oxidize
benzene which were obtained from two adjacent Fe(III)-reducing sites and from methanogenic and uncontaminated
zones. Denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis of 16S rDNA sequences amplified with bacterial or
Geobacteraceae-specific primers indicated significant differences in the composition of the microbial communities
at the different sites. Most notable was a selective enrichment of microorganisms in the Geobacter cluster
seen in the benzene-degrading sediments. This finding was in accordance with phospholipid fatty acid analysis
and most-probable-number–PCR enumeration, which indicated that members of the family Geobacteraceae
were more numerous in these sediments. A benzene-oxidizing Fe(III)-reducing enrichment culture was established
from benzene-degrading sediments and contained an organism closely related to the uncultivated
Geobacter spp. This genus contains the only known organisms that can oxidize aromatic compounds with the
reduction of Fe(III). Sequences closely related to the Fe(III) reducer Geothrix fermentans and the aerobe
Variovorax paradoxus were also amplified from the benzene-degrading enrichment and were present in the
benzene-degrading sediments. However, neither G. fermentans nor V. paradoxus is known to oxidize aromatic
compounds with the reduction of Fe(III), and there was no apparent enrichment of these organisms in the
benzene-degrading sediments. These results suggest that Geobacter spp. play an important role in the anaerobic
oxidation of benzene in the Bemidji aquifer and that molecular community analysis may be a powerful tool
for predicting a site’s capacity for anaerobic benzene degradation.
In recent years, the potential for anaerobic in situ biodegradation
of monoaromatic hydrocarbons has received increasing
attention (e.g., references 4, 14, 24, and 37). Petroleum
contamination of aquifers is common in the United States and
other industrialized countries, with sources of contamination
including leaking underground fuel storage tanks, leachate
from landfills, and surface spills of petroleum products (42,
47). Although petroleum is comprised of a complex mixture of
hydrocarbons, monoaromatic hydrocarbons (benzene, toluene,
ethylbenzene, and xylenes [collectively known as BTEX]) are
of particular concern. BTEX compounds are the most watersoluble
constituents of petroleum and have a relatively low
sediment-water coefficient (11, 51). As a result, they are highly
mobile in aquifers and are the most prevalent petroleum constituents
in contaminated groundwater. Among BTEX compounds,
benzene is of the most concern because it is highly
toxic and is a known carcinogen, and therefore it is a U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency “priority pollutant.”
Although BTEX compounds are rapidly degraded under
aerobic conditions (40, 49), aerobic biodegradation is selflimiting
due to the low aqueous solubility of oxygen and the
rapid depletion of oxygen that occurs in reduced environments
(49). At the onset of anaerobic conditions, Fe(III) is generally
the most abundant terminal electron acceptor in aquifer sediments
(23). Therefore, biodegradation of BTEX compounds
under Fe(III)-reducing conditions has the potential to be an
effective natural attenuation process (25). However, anaerobic
biodegradation of some BTEX compounds, particularly benzene,
remains poorly understood. To date, no organism capable
of anaerobic benzene oxidation has been isolated, and
investigations of anaerobic benzene degradation under various
geochemical conditions often report conflicting results (24).
Recent studies in a petroleum-contaminated aquifer in Bemidji,
Minn., provided evidence for benzene mineralization
under in situ Fe(III)-reducing conditions (4). However, the
capacity for benzene oxidation coupled to Fe(III) reduction
was not detected at the other petroleum-contaminated aquifers
that were evaluated. Furthermore, at the Bemidji aquifer,
anaerobic benzene oxidation under in situ conditions was only
found within a portion of the Fe(III)-reducing zone (4). Although
there were no apparent correlations between benzene
oxidation and geochemical parameters (5), there was a strong
correlation between anaerobic benzene oxidation and the
abundance of members of the family Geobacteraceae (4). This
family includes the only organisms known to couple the oxidation
of several monoaromatics, including toluene, with Fe(III)
reduction (10, 30). The results suggested that the microbial
community composition in the Bemidji aquifer may have
played a key role in anaerobic benzene degradation and that
Geobacteraceae, in particular, were associated with benzenedegrading
activity (4). However, past studies have not evaluated
the diversity of other microbial groups with molecular
methods nor did they evaluate which microorganisms within
* Corresponding author. Mailing address: 203 N Morrill Science
Center IV N, Department of Microbiology, University of Massachusetts,
Amherst, MA 01003. Phone: (413) 545-9651. Fax: (413) 545-
1578. E-mail: dlovley@microbio.umass.edu.
† Present address: Department of Biological Sciences, University of
Massachusetts, Lowell, MA 01854.
‡ Present address: Environmental Sciences and Engineering, University
of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC 27599.
3056
Downloaded from http://aem.asm.org/ on June 22, 2017 by INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY NEW DELHI
the family Geobacteraceae are associated with the capacity for
anaerobic benzene degradation. Therefore, no conclusions
have been drawn regarding which species of Geobacteraceae
are associated with benzene-oxidizing activity and whether
other, unrelated, phylogenetic groups can also play a role in
benzene degradation.
The purpose of this study was to use a multifaceted approach,
including biodegradation studies, molecular phylogenetic
approaches, lipid analysis, and culturing studies, to analyze
the microbial community associated with benzene
oxidation at the Bemidji aquifer. The results suggest that a
narrow phylogenetic group of organisms within the Geobacter
cluster (22) play an important role in the benzene-oxidizing
community.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Study site and sample collection. Sediment samples were collected from the
U.S. Geological Survey Groundwater Toxics Site at Bemidji, Minn. This site is
located in a remote forested area and was contaminated in 1979 when a pipeline
transporting crude oil burst (19). An anaerobic contaminant plume containing
BTEX compounds has formed downgradient from the crude oil source. The
contaminated portion of the aquifer is composed of fairly homogeneous, sandy
to coarse-grained sediments (19), making it an ideal site for groundwater contaminant
research. In addition, considerable information is available regarding
contaminant composition, hydrogeological conditions, and geochemical conditions
at this site (43).
Samples were collected in 1996 and 1997 as previously described (4) from
several locations along the contaminant gradient and from an uncontaminated
site. Sites IR-1, IR-2, and IR-3 were sediments in which Fe(III) reduction was
the terminal-electron-accepting process (TEAP), with site IR-1 being closest to
the contaminant source. Sites IR-1, IR-2, and IR-3 correspond to sites 97-1, 97-2,
and 97-3, respectively, as identified in a previous study at this site (4). Sediments
96-1 are Fe(III)-reducing sediments collected in 1996. Methanogenic sediments
were sampled closer to the source of contamination and uncontaminated sediments
were recovered from a nearby site just outside the contaminant plume. At
each site, sediments from a depth of approximately 9 to 10 m were collected
aseptically from drilling cores (34) and were held anoxically on ice during overnight
transport to the laboratory. Sediment samples were homogenized and
divided into aliquots for subsequent manipulations in an N2-filled glove bag. For
enrichment cultures, 1 to 2 g of sediment was added to pressure tubes for later
dilution as described below. For phospholipid fatty acid (PLFA) and molecular
analyses, 100 g of sediment was transferred to sterile conical tubes and stored at
280°C. The TEAP at each of these sites was confirmed with geochemical and
activity measurements as previously described (4, 5). Sediments from sites IR-3
and 96-1 mineralized benzene under in situ conditions (5). Anaerobic oxidation
of benzene was measured with [14C]benzene as previously described (4).
Enrichment cultures. Enrichment cultures of benzene-oxidizing Fe(III) reducers
were developed with inocula collected from site 96-1. Cells were released
from sediment particles and diluted in Fe(III) reducer medium as previously
described (4, 29), except that 140 mM benzene was used as the electron donor.
Briefly, the medium contained poorly crystalline Fe(III) oxide (30 mM) as an
electron acceptor, 4 mM nitrilotriacetic acid as an Fe(III) chelator, and 1.3 mM
Fe(II) chloride as a reductant. Initial dilution tubes also contained 0.1% pyrophosphate
in order to release cells bound to sediment particles (7). Mostprobable-
number (MPN) tubes were incubated at 25°C for 2 months prior to
enumeration. Utilization of benzene was determined by monitoring benzene
removal in the headspace of inoculated tubes relative to uninoculated controls.
Benzene concentrations were determined by gas chromatography. Benzene mineralization
was also monitored by adding [14C]benzene ([U-14C]benzene, 58.2
mCi/mmol; Sigma Radiochemicals, St. Louis, Mo.) to enrichment cultures and
measuring the production of 14CO2 by gas proportional counting as previously
described (26). The highest positive dilutions were enriched for Fe(III) reducers
capable of degrading benzene by the re-addition of benzene and continued
monitoring of benzene removal. Active enrichments were transferred to fresh
Fe(III)-reducing media prior to phylogenetic analyses.
16S rDNA phylogenetic analysis of enrichment cultures. The phylogeny of the
dominant organisms in benzene-oxidizing enrichment cultures was investigated
by using 16S ribosomal DNA (rDNA) sequence analysis. Prior to DNA extraction,
cultures were treated with oxalic acid in order to chelate and remove
Fe(III), which inhibits Taq polymerase (48). Then, 15 ml of 300 mM filtersterilized
oxalic acid was added to 5 ml of enrichment culture and mixed thoroughly.
Cells were collected by centrifugation at 5,000 3 g for 5 min, washed in
1 ml of 30 mM NaHCO3, and resuspended in 250 ml of 30 mM NaHCO3. The
resulting cell suspensions were subjected to three freeze-thaw cycles at 270 and
65°C and then extracted with phenol, phenol-chloroform-isoamyl alcohol (25:24:
1), and chloroform-isoamyl alcohol (24:1) (39). A 5-ml portion of the resulting
aqueous phase was used as a template for PCR with primers 338F-GC (the
complement of EUB338) (1) and 907R (21). Genomic DNA was also extracted
from pure cultures of Geobacter chapellei, Geobacter sulfurreducens, Escherichia
coli, Desulfococcus multivorans, and Desulfuromusa acetexigens (6) for use as
reference DNA in PCR and denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis (DGGE).
PCR mixtures containing 50 mM KCl, 10 mM Tris-Cl (pH 8.3), 1.5 mM MgCl2,
200 mM each deoxynucleotide triphosphate (dATP, dCTP, dGTP, and dTTP),
0.6 mM each primer, and 400 ng of bovine serum albumin (BSA) per ml in a total
volume of 100 ml were assembled and treated with UV for 10 min. A total of 2.5
U of AmpliTaq Taq polymerase (Perkin-Elmer Cetus, Norwalk, Conn.) and
template DNA were then added to each reaction. Amplification was performed
in a GeneAmp PCR System 2400 thermal cycler (Perkin-Elmer Cetus) with an
initial denaturation at 94°C for 90 s; 30 cycles of 94°C for 30 s, 40°C for 30 s, and
72°C for 30 s; and a final extension at 72°C for 5 min. PCR products were
analyzed by agarose gel electrophoresis by standard techniques (39).
The 16S rDNA amplicons were resolved by DGGE with a 50 to 80% denaturant
gradient (where 100% is equivalent to 7Murea and 40% formamide) (35)
on a 7% acrylamide gel in 13 TAE (40 mM Tris-acetate [pH 7.4], 20 mM sodium
acetate, 1 mM EDTA). DGGE gels were run for 16 h at 65 V and then were
stained with ethidium bromide (39). Resolved PCR products were visualized by
UV transillumination. Isolated bands were excised and pulverized with a sterile
mortar and pestle, and DNA was eluted overnight in 50 ml of 0.1 M Tris (pH 8.0)
at 4°C. Partial 16S rDNAs were then reamplified from excised bands, as described
above, and analyzed by a second DGGE in order to ensure that heteroduplexes
were resolved. Once again, isolated bands were excised, and 16S rDNA
was reamplified as described above, except that no GC clamp (35) was incorporated
into primer 338F. These PCR products were purified by using Wizard PCR
Preps (Promega, Madison, Wis.) and sequenced by using Dye Deoxy Terminator
Cycle Sequencing (Perkin-Elmer Cetus) and an ABI 373A automated sequencer
(Applied Biosystems, Foster City, Calif.) at the Michigan State University Sequencing
Facility or the University of Massachusetts Department of Microbiology.
Phylogenetic diversity of sediment microbial communities. Detailed phylogenetic
analyses were focused on the uncontaminated site and the site where
Anderson et al. (4) demonstrated that benzene oxidation occurred under in situ
Fe(III)-reducing conditions (site IR-3). The 16S rDNA phylogeny of dominant
members of the sediment microbial community was analyzed by using PCRDGGE
and sequence analysis. DNA was extracted from triplicate 500-mg samples
of homogenized sediment by using the FastDNA soil extraction kit (Bio 101,
Vista, Calif.) as described by the manufacturer, except that cell lysis was carried
out with a Mini-BeadBeater (Biospec Products, Inc., Bartlesville, Okla.) at maximum
speed for 1 min. DNA was eluted from Bio 101 cartridges with 50 ml of
sterile Milli-Q water. For analysis of the diversity of Geobacteraceae, partial 16S
rDNA was amplified from triplicate sediment DNA extractions with primers
338F-GC and Geo825R. PCR conditions were as described above for primers
338F and 907R except that PCR mixtures were not treated with UV and the PCR
temperature profile included touchdown primer annealing (12) from 65 to 55°C
(decreasing 0.5°C per cycle) for 20 cycles, followed by 10 cycles at 55°C.
Geobacteraceae 16S rDNA amplicons were analyzed by DGGE on a 55 to 70%
denaturant gradient, and individual bands were excised, checked for heteroduplexes,
reamplified, and sequenced as described above. For analysis of the dominant
members of the bacterial community, partial 16S rDNAs were amplified
from triplicate sediment DNA samples by using primers 338F-GC and 907R as
described above. In order to improve detection of faint bands in subsequent
DGGE analyses, 200 ml of the resulting PCR product from each sediment DNA
sample was concentrated by lyophilization. Concentrated PCR products were
then resolved by DGGE and reamplified as described above, except that gel
denaturant gradients consisted of 30 to 70%, 50 to 70%, and 60 to 80% denaturant.
MPN-PCR analysis of sediment Geobacteraceae. MPN-PCR analysis of
Geobacteraceae 16S rDNA at the methanogenic site was conducted as previously
described (4).
Sequence analysis. 16S rDNA sequences were checked for potential chimeras
with the Ribosomal Database Project (RDP) CHECK_CHIMERA program and
by determining the secondary structure of selected sequences. Sequences were
then aligned with closely related 16S rRNA sequences from GenBank and the
RDP. Unambiguously aligned base positions were used to calculate Jukes-Cantor
distances and construct phylogenetic trees with the maximum-parsimony and
least-squares methods.
PLFA analyses. PLFAs were extracted from sediment samples by adding 142.5
ml of methylene chloride-methanol-phosphate buffer (monobasic, pH 7.0) (1:2:
0.8) to 70 g (wet weight) of sediment, followed by sonication for 2 min and
incubation for 3 h at room temperature. The extractant was then separated from
the sediment by centrifugation and transferred to a clean tube. The remaining
sediment was washed with 37.5 ml of methylene chloride, and the resulting
extractant was combined with the previous fraction. Then, 37.5 ml of sterile
distilled water was added to the extractant and, after thorough mixing, the
organic and aqueous phases were separated by centrifugation. The lower (organic)
phase was removed by pipetting it to a clean tube and then dried under a
stream of N2. Total lipid was fractionated as described by Guckert et al. (17).
PLFA were then transesterified into methyl esters (17) prior to identification and
quantification by gas chromatography-mass spectrometry (38).
Nucleotide sequence accession numbers. Sequences were deposited in Gen-
Bank under accession numbers AF104267 to AF104299.
VOL. 65, 1999 ANAEROBIC BENZENE-DEGRADING COMMUNITIES 3057
Downloaded from http://aem.asm.org/ on June 22, 2017 by INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY NEW DELHI
RESULTS
Distribution of benzene mineralization potential and MPNPCR
of Geobacteraceae. Anaerobic benzene mineralization under
in situ conditions was negligible at the uncontaminated site
and in the methanogenic sediments, with less than 6% of the
[14C]benzene added recovered as 14CO2 after 85 days. This
result contrasted with the mineralization of more than 60% of
the added benzene in sediments from IR-3 and was comparable
to the very slight benzene mineralization that was also
observed at IR-1 and IR-2 (4). MPN-PCR analysis indicated
that there were 2.2 3 105 6 7.8 3 104 (mean 6 the standard
deviation) copies of Geobacteraceae 16S rDNA g21 in the
methanogenic sediments. This finding compared with previously
reported estimates of Geobacteraceae 16S rDNA of
1.48 3 103 6 1.04 3 103 copies g of sediment21, 9.24 3 104 6
3.49 3 104 copies g of sediment21, and 9.24 3 104 6 3.49 3 104
copies g of sediment21 in the background site and at sites IR-1
and IR-2, respectively, but it was significantly lower than the
1.50 3 107 6 6.72 3 106 copies g of sediment21 for Geobacteraceae
previously found at site IR-3 (4).
PLFA analysis of microbial community. PLFA concentrations
were highest at site IR-3 (170.6 pmol g21), decreased at
sites IR-2 and IR-1 (32.2 and 65.0 pmol g21, respectively), and
lowest at the uncontaminated site (7.9 pmol g21). PLFA data
from the methanogenic site were omitted due to heavy petroleum
contamination at this site that appeared to carry over into
the PLFA assays. Hierarchical cluster analysis of the sediment
PLFA profiles (Fig. 1) indicated that microbial community
composition at the uncontaminated site was distinct from that
at sites where Fe(III) reduction was the dominant TEAP.
PLFA profiles from the Fe(III)-reducing sites were similar and
exhibited a higher diversity of PLFA than that observed at the
uncontaminated site. There were, however, substantial differences
between the PLFA profiles extracted from each Fe(III)-
reducing site. The distribution of Geobacter species in the
sediments was estimated by evaluating the five PLFAs that are
most abundant in known Geobacter species (37a), with the
exclusion of the ubiquitous saturated PLFAs 16:0 and 18:0.
This analysis indicated that the concentration of Geobacter
indicative PLFAs was highest at site IR-3, lower at sites IR-2
and IR-1, and lowest at the uncontaminated site (Fig. 2). However,
these results must be viewed with caution because the
PLFAs used in this analysis are not unique to Geobacter spp.
but are also present in other gram-negative bacteria (45).
Phylogenetic diversity of sediment microbial community.
PCR-DGGE analysis of triplicate sediment samples indicated
that DGGE patterns from each site were consistent and reproducible
(Fig. 3). The DGGE patterns were clearly resolved
with fewer than 25 bands per lane (Fig. 3 and 4). The use of
several different ranges of denaturant gradients improved the
DGGE analysis and provided more-detailed focus on separate
segments of the community with each different gradient (Fig.
4).
Detailed PCR-DGGE and sequence analysis was focused on
site IR-3, the most active site of anaerobic benzene degradation
(4), and the uncontaminated site. There were marked
differences in the DGGE profiles of bacterial 16S rDNA from
the two sites (Fig. 4). The diversity of dominant bacteria appeared
to be higher at site IR-3, as was evident from the fact
that, regardless of the denaturant gradient, far more bands
were present in DGGE profiles from site IR-3 than at the
uncontaminated site.
While the two sites shared several 16S rDNA fragments that
were either identical or extremely closely related (Fig. 4), the
majority of sequences were unique to each site. One of the
most conspicuous differences between these sites was band
Geo-83, which was the predominant band at site IR-3 and was
not detected at the uncontaminated site. Comparative sequence
analysis placed Geo-83 within the Geobacter cluster,
with its closest relative being G. chapellei (Fig. 5). Other 16S
rDNA sequences detected in DGGE profiles from site IR-3,
but not at the uncontaminated site, included bands Geo-125
and Geo-144 within the Geobacteraceae family (Fig. 5); Gthrx-
84, most closely related to Geothrix fermentans; several beta
proteobacteria (Beta-137, Beta-169, and Beta-183, most
closely related to Azoarcus evansii, and Beta-142, most closely
related to an unidentified toluene degrader, isolate D8 [33]);
and several sequences (sequences 81, 85, 124, and 184) which
appear to represent novel lineages (Fig. 6).
Comparison of DGGE patterns from all five sites along the
petroleum contaminant gradient at Bemidji indicated major
differences in microbial community structure between the uncontaminated
site, the Fe(III)-reducing sites (sites IR-3, IR-2,
and IR-1, in order of increasing contamination), and the
FIG. 1. Hierarchical cluster analysis of PLFAs extracted from sediment samples
from IR-1, IR-2, IR-3, and the uncontaminated site.
FIG. 2. Distribution of Geobacteraceae-indicative PLFA functional groups at
sites IR-1, IR-2, and IR-3 and the uncontaminated site.
3058 ROONEY-VARGA ET AL. APPL. ENVIRON. MICROBIOL.
Downloaded from http://aem.asm.org/ on June 22, 2017 by INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY NEW DELHI
methanogenic (most heavily contaminated) site (Fig. 3). While
the overall DGGE patterns did not differ drastically within the
Fe(III)-reducing zone, several differences between site IR-3
and sites IR-1 and IR-2 were apparent. These included a much
higher intensity of the bands representing Geo-83 and Geo-125
at site IR-3, as well as the presence of several faint bands at
sites IR-1 and IR-2 that were not recovered from site IR-3.
Bands representing Beta-145 and Gthrx-84 were clearly evident
at all of the Fe(III)-reducing sites.
Phylogenetic diversity of Geobacteraceae in sediment community.
Because of the apparent enrichment of Geobacteraceae
in the Fe(III)-reducing sediments that were most active
in benzene degradation, the diversity of the Geobacteraceae
was examined in more detail with the primer sets designed to
specifically target Geobacteraceae. The DGGE patterns from
the uncontaminated and benzene-oxidizing sediments revealed
marked differences in their Geobacteraceae populations, with
no shared sequences apparent. Two 16S rDNA fragments
(Geo-83 and Geo-60) were consistently found in PCR products
from the benzene-oxidizing sediments from site IR-3 (Fig. 7).
Geo-83 was identical in sequence to one of the predominant
sequences retrieved from site IR-3 with the less-specific bacterial
primers. Like Geo-83, Geo-60 was most closely related to
G. chapellei and Pelobacter propionicus. Geo-83 and Geo-60
were the dominant PCR products under several different analysis
conditions, including extraction of DNA by a freeze-thaw
method (see Materials and Methods), amplification by a seminested
PCR protocol (with primers 8F [44] and Geo825R
followed by primers 338F-GC and Geo-825R), and 1025 dilution
of template DNA prior to amplification (data not shown).
In addition to these two predominant bands, 16S rDNA amplified
from site IR-3 contained several bands of much lower
intensity (Geo-58, Geo-48, and Geo-47), which were not members
of the Geobacter cluster. Phylogenetic analysis of these
sequences suggested that they were deeply branching members
of the delta subclass of the proteobacteria and indicated that
they probably represent undescribed genera (Fig. 5). However,
especially because the current analysis is limited to about 300
base positions, it is difficult to infer phylogenetic relationships
of sequences with no known close relatives.
In contrast to the results from site IR-3, the DGGE patterns
from the uncontaminated zone varied considerably among
triplicates or when sediment DNA was diluted prior to amplification
(Fig. 7). 16S rDNA sequences retrieved from the uncontaminated
site with Geobacteraceae-targeted primers
(Geo-2, Geo-3, and Geo-43) fell within a tight phylogenetic
cluster that appeared to fall outside of the Geobacteraceae
family (Fig. 5). These sequences were distinct from those retrieved
from site IR-3 and may represent deeply branching
delta proteobacteria (Fig. 5).
Benzene-oxidizing enrichment culture. A sediment-free enrichment
culture which reduced Fe(III) in a medium with
benzene as the sole electron donor and poorly crystalline
Fe(III) oxide as the sole electron acceptor was established with
sediments from site 96-1. Site 96-1 is analogous to site IR-3 in
that it was determined to be within the Fe(III)-reducing zone
of the aquifer and to actively degrade benzene under in situ
conditions (4). Benzene-degrading enrichment cultures could
not be established with sediments from the uncontaminated
site. When [14C]benzene was added to the enrichment culture
14CO2 was produced over time, with ca. 25% of the [14C]benzene
added to cultures being mineralized to 14CO2 within 25
days. Thus, it was clearly demonstrated that this enrichment
could anaerobically oxidize benzene.
DGGE analysis of 16S rDNA retrieved from benzene-oxidizing
enrichment cultures revealed three distinct bands (data
not shown), with the most intense band (Benz-76) representing
an organism closely related to G. chapellei (Fig. 5). Comparative
sequence analysis revealed that one of the remaining
bands (Benz-88) was closely related to Variovorax paradoxus
HW1 (20) and an unidentified toluene degrader, D8 (33),
while the second remaining band (Benz-88) was closely related
to G. fermentans.
FIG. 3. DGGE profiles of bacterial 16S rDNA fragments retrieved from Bemidji sediments along the contaminant gradient. Triplicate DNA extractions were
analyzed from each site. A 60 to 80% denaturant gradient range was used.
VOL. 65, 1999 ANAEROBIC BENZENE-DEGRADING COMMUNITIES 3059
Downloaded from http://aem.asm.org/ on June 22, 2017 by INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY NEW DELHI
DISCUSSION
The results from molecular phylogenetic analysis of sediments
and enrichment cultures, as well as the PLFA analysis,
demonstrate that anaerobic benzene mineralization under
Fe(III)-reducing conditions is associated with increased numbers
of Geobacter spp. This finding might have been predicted
from previous pure-culture studies because Geobacter spp. are
the only organisms available in culture that are known to oxidize
aromatic compounds with the reduction of Fe(III) (10, 22,
25, 28). However, it is generally considered that the most
environmentally significant microorganisms are not readily recovered
in laboratory cultures (2). Furthermore, the Geobacter
spp. currently in culture are not known to metabolize benzene.
Therefore, it was not necessarily expected that organisms
closely related to the Geobacter spp. that are available in pure
culture would predominate in the zone of active benzene degradation
at Bemidji. These results, and the fact that a
Geobacter species was a dominant organism in a benzenedegrading,
Fe(III)-reducing enrichment culture that was established
from the zone of benzene degradation, suggest that it
may be possible to culture the environmentally significant microorganisms
from the Fe(III)-reducing zone of petroleumcontaminated
aquifers.
Comparative studies with MPN-PCR and PLFA analyses.
The Bemidji aquifer provides the only site as yet described in
which benzene is anaerobically degraded under in situ Fe(III)-
reducing conditions (4, 5). Although benzene oxidation coupled
to Fe(III) reduction was previously reported in other
aquifer sediments (31, 32), in those cases benzene degradation
only took place when the availability of Fe(III) was increased
with chelators or humic substances that serve as electron shuttles
to Fe(III) (27). Other aromatic hydrocarbons, including
toluene and naphthalene, are also degraded under Fe(III)-
reducing conditions at the Bemidji site (5). However, the degradation
of these hydrocarbons is not localized at only one site
as is benzene degradation. Since attempts to obtain pure cultures
of benzene-degrading Fe(III) reducers have as yet been
unsuccessful, it was considered that comparative studies between
sites that were geochemically similar but differed in the
capacity to degrade benzene might reveal microorganisms specifically
associated with anaerobic benzene degradation.
Results of MPN-PCR studies with PCR primers specific for
microorganisms in the family Geobacteraceae reported here
and previously (4) indicated that the benzene-degrading sedi-
FIG. 4. DGGE analysis of 16S rDNA fragments amplified from the uncontaminated
site (Uncont.) and benzene-oxidizing site IR-3 with primers that target
16S rDNAs of most bacteria in several different denaturant gradient ranges.
FIG. 5. 16S rRNA phylogenetic tree of Geobacteraceae and delta proteobacterial
sequences from the uncontaminated site and site IR-3 and from benzeneoxidizing
enrichment cultures. Phylogenetic trees were constructed by using
maximum-parsimony methods with 100 bootstrapped data sets. A total of 366
base positions were considered in the analysis. Bootstrap values of greater than
50 (of 100 trees) are shown adjacent to the nodes. The scale bar is in fixed
nucleotide substitutions per 100 sequence positions. A similar tree topology was
observed for trees constructed by using least-squares methods (data not shown).
3060 ROONEY-VARGA ET AL. APPL. ENVIRON. MICROBIOL.
Downloaded from http://aem.asm.org/ on June 22, 2017 by INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY NEW DELHI
ments from site IR-3 had significantly more Geobacteraceae
than did the other sediments. The PLFA analysis also suggested
that there was an enrichment of Geobacteraceae at site
IR-3. However, the PLFA data further indicated that there was
a general increase in the microbial population at site IR-3,
suggesting that, in addition to Geobacteraceae, other microorganisms
were also enriched at this site. Therefore, in order to
more fully explore the microbial populations that might be
involved in benzene degradation, the microbial community was
analyzed in more detail with DGGE.
Comparison of overall bacterial diversity with DGGE. Although
PCR-DGGE analysis has several potential limitations
(13, 18, 50), this approach was clearly effective in identifying
the major shifts in the microbial community in the Bemidji
aquifer. In an attempt to avoid biases, primers that targeted
bacteria were employed under low-stringency conditions at
annealing temperatures with a minimum number of amplification
cycles. It seems likely from analysis of triplicate sediment
DNA extractions that any PCR biases inherent in this approach
were consistent between samples and thus differences
in DGGE profiles between sites reflected major differences in
the composition of the environmental DNA templates.
The fairly simple DGGE patterns obtained with domainlevel
primers suggests that relatively few species dominated at
each of the Bemidji sites, especially at the uncontaminated site.
This conclusion is also supported by community PLFA profiles,
which exhibited relatively low diversity compared to surficial
soils. The apparent simplicity of these subsurface microbial
communities is not surprising given the low availability of organic
carbon and nutrients generally found in subsurface sediments
(3, 5, 16). Other studies of phylogenetic diversity in
subsurface microbial communities have also indicated relatively
low levels of diversity (8, 36) compared to surficial soil
communities (9, 15, 41).
The DGGE profiles indicated that the microbial community
composition differed markedly among the aerobic, Fe(III)-
reducing, and methanogenic zones of the aquifer. In addition
to different bands predominating in samples from each TEAP
zone, more bands were recovered from all of the contaminated
sediments than from the uncontaminated sediments. These
results suggest that different microorganisms have a selective
advantage in different TEAP zones and that the BTEX contaminants
stimulated the growth of microorganisms that were
not dominant members of the microbial community in the
uncontaminated sediments. It is likely that dominant microorganisms
that grew in response to the BTEX input were involved
in BTEX degradation. However, organic matter produced
by the BTEX degraders could provide substrates for the
growth of lesser quantities of other organisms.
Enrichment of Geobacter spp. in the zone of benzene degradation.
In accord with the MPN-PCR results with Geobacteraceae
primers, the DGGE analysis of the sediments with bacterial
PCR primers suggested that the IR-3 sediments in which
benzene was actively degraded were enriched with Geobacteraceae.
Several Geobacteraceae bands such as Geo-83 and Geo-
125 (which was almost identical to Geo-83) had much higher
intensity at site IR-3 than at site IR-1 or IR-2, and these bands
were not detected in sediments from the uncontaminated or
methanogenic sites. Geo-83 and the closely related sequences
represent a distinct group in the Geobacter cluster within the
family Geobacteraceae (Fig. 5). A more detailed evaluation of
the diversity of Geobacteraceae with primers specific for this
FIG. 6. Phylogenetic analysis of 16S rRNA sequences from the uncontaminated
and benzene-oxidizing sites and from enrichment cultures. Phylogenetic
trees were constructed by using maximum-parsimony methods with 100 bootstrapped
data sets. Bootstrap values (of 100 trees) that are greater than 50 are
shown adjacent to the nodes. A total of 402 base positions were considered in the
analysis. The scale bar is in fixed nucleotide substitutions per 100 sequence
positions. A similar tree topology was observed for trees constructed by using
least-squares methods (data not shown).
FIG. 7. DGGE analysis of 16S rDNA fragments amplified from the uncontaminated
(uncont.) site and the benzene-oxidizing site (IR-3) by using
Geobacteraceae-targeted primers.
VOL. 65, 1999 ANAEROBIC BENZENE-DEGRADING COMMUNITIES 3061
Downloaded from http://aem.asm.org/ on June 22, 2017 by INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY NEW DELHI
family further demonstrated the enrichment of the Geobacter
cluster at site IR-3 and suggested that these organisms were
not present in the uncontaminated sediments. The only sequences
that were recovered from the uncontaminated sediments
with Geobacteraceae-targeted primers were not closely
related to known Geobacteraceae spp.
The finding that there is a specific enrichment of Geobacter
spp. in the zone of benzene degradation is of interest because
Geobacter spp. are the only organisms in pure culture that have
been reported to oxidize aromatic compounds to carbon dioxide
(28). Although no pure cultures have been found to degrade
benzene, as reported here, a Geobacter sp. closely related
to the sequences that predominated in the benzene
degradation zone was a dominant organism in the benzeneoxidizing,
Fe(III)-reducing enrichment culture (Benz-76). A
benzene-degrading enrichment culture could only be established
with sediments from the zone of benzene degradation
and not from the uncontaminated sediments, which lack the
Geobacter spp. that predominate in the zone of benzene degradation.
Interestingly, a Geobacter cluster organism, FeR, was
also the dominant member of toluene-degrading enrichment
cultures established with sediments from the Bemidji site (4).
Comparison of FeR to the Geobacteraceae sequences described
here suggested that FeR was closely related to, but
distinct from, Benz-76 (sharing 94 of 102 base positions).
Another sequence that was consistently recovered from the
benzene-degrading sediments but not the uncontaminated sediments
was Gthrx-84, which is most closely related to G. fermentans.
G. fermentans is capable of completely oxidizing acetate
to carbon dioxide with Fe(III) serving as the sole electron
acceptor but, in contrast to several Geobacter species, it does
not use aromatic compounds (28). A sequence closely related
to G. fermentans was recovered from the benzene-oxidizing,
Fe(III)-reducing enrichment culture, but the DGGE band for
this sequence was not as intense as the Geobacter band. Thus,
it is not known if this organism was involved in the benzene
degradation or survived on the products of the Geobacter sp. in
the enrichment that is hypothesized to have been the benzene
degrader. Previous studies employing a dilution-to-extinction
culturing method demonstrated that G. fermentans was a numerically
dominant acetate-oxidizing Fe(III) reducer in uncontaminated
sediments from Bemidji, as well as in sediments
from the benzene-degrading, Fe(III) reduction zone (4). In
contrast to the pervasiveness of Geothrix spp., Geobacter spp.
were only numerically significant in the zone of benzene degradation
in those culturing studies. While Gthrx-84 was not
detected in the uncontaminated sediments, this sequence was
found at comparable band intensities in all of the sediments in
which Fe(III) reduction was the TEAP. The fact that the
Gthrx-84 sequence was not uniquely enriched in the zone of
benzene degradation suggests that it is not specifically involved
in benzene degradation at site IR-3. In a similar manner,
although the sequence Beta-169 was recovered from site IR-3
but not from the uncontaminated site, the intensities of the
Beta-169 band were similar in all three Fe(III)-reducing sites,
suggesting that it was not uniquely associated with benzene
degradation.
The sequence Beta-142 that was also found at site IR-3 but
not at the uncontaminated site is most closely related to V.
parodoxus HW1 (20) and an unidentified toluene degrader,
strain D8 (33). V. parodoxus is an obligate aerobe (46), and
although they have not been characterized, strains HW1 and
D8 were also grown under aerobic conditions (20, 33). Therefore,
it seems unlikely that these organisms are capable of
aromatic degradation under anaerobic, Fe(III)-reducing conditions.
In addition, Beta-142 was detected at other Fe(III)-
reducing sites, albeit with lower band intensities (Fig. 3), indicating
that its presence is not unique to the benzene-oxidizing
site, IR-3. However, a sequence closely related to V. parodoxus
was recovered from the benzene-oxidizing, Fe(III)-reducing
enrichment culture along with a Geobacter sequence and a
Geothrix sequence. Thus, the possibility that an organism(s)
closely related to V. parodoxus is involved in anaerobic benzene
degradation cannot be eliminated. Similarly, it is possible that
anaerobic benzene degradation is carried out by a microbial
consortium that includes Geobacter sp., Geothrix sp., and a
relative of V. parodoxus, all of which were detected in both the
benzene-oxidizing sediments and the enrichment.
In summary, although comparative analysis of 16S rDNA
sequences does not allow definitive determination of which
microorganisms are responsible for a specific metabolism in
the environment, the results suggest that specific Geobacter
spp. are associated with the capacity for benzene degradation
in this petroleum-contaminated aquifer. Evidence supporting
this conclusion includes (i) the significant increase in
Geobacteraceae within the zone of benzene degradation; (ii)
specific enrichment of a tight phylogenetic cluster of Geobacter
spp. in the zone of benzene degradation that is not found in the
uncontaminated sediments; (iii) the fact that the genus
Geobacter contains organisms known to be able to oxidize
aromatic compounds with the reduction of Fe(III); and (iv) the
finding that Geobacter spp. were dominant organisms in a
benzene-oxidizing, Fe(III)-reducing enrichment culture established
with benzene-degrading sediments from this aquifer.
This is an important finding because, to date, the specific
enrichment of Geobacter spp. is the only variable which has
been found to be associated with the capacity for anaerobic
benzene degradation at this site. A variety of other geochemical
parameters were not predictive of the potential for benzene
degradation (5). Thus, these results demonstrate that phylogenetic
studies of contaminated aquifer sediments can yield insights
into the microorganisms associated with contaminant
degradation and raise the possibility that phylogenetic analyses
will be useful for predicting the potential for anaerobic benzene
degradation at other sites.
