B77
Bacterial community dynamics during in-situ bioremediation of petroleum
waste sludge in landfarming sites
E. Katsivela1,2,*, E.R.B. Moore3
, D. Maroukli1,2, C. Stro¨mpl4
, D. Pieper4 & N. Kalogerakis1
1
Laboratory of Biochemical Engineering & Environmental Biotechnology, Department of Environmental
Engineering, Technical University of Crete, Polytechneioupolis, GR-73100 Chania, Greece; 2
Technological
Educational Institute of Crete, Department of Natural Resources and Environment, Romanou 3, Halepa, GR-
73133 Chania, Crete, Greece; 3
Macaulay Institute, Craigiebuckler, Aberdeen AB15 8QH, Scotland, UK;
4
National Research Centre for Biotechnology (GBF), Division of Microbiology, Mascheroder Weg 1,
D-38124 Braunschweig, Germany (* author for correspondence: katsivela@chania.teicrete.gr)
Key words: bacterial community dynamics, in-situ biodegradation, petroleum hydrocarbons, refinery waste
sludge, 16S rDNA, T-RFLP fingerprinting
Abstract
In-situ bioremediation of petroleum waste sludge in landfarming sites of Motor Oil Hellas (petroleum
refinery) was studied by monitoring the changes of the petroleum composition of the waste sludge, as
well as the changes in the structure of the microbial community, for a time period of 14 months. The
analyses indicated an enhanced degradation of the petroleum hydrocarbons in the landfarming areas. A
depletion of n-alkanes of approximately 75–100% was obtained. Marked changes of the microbial
communities of the landfarms occurred concomitantly with the degradation of the petroleum hydrocarbons.
The results obtained from terminal restriction fragment length polymorphism (T-RFLP)
analysis of polymerase chain reaction (PCR) amplified 16S rRNA genes demonstrated that bacteria
originating from the refinery waste sludge and newly selected bacteria dominated the soil bacterial
community during the period of the highest degradation activity. However, the diversity of the
microbial community was decreased with increased degradation of the petroleum hydrocarbons contained
in the landfarms. T-RFLP fingerprints of bacteria of the genera Enterobacter and Ochrobactrum
were detected in the landfarmed soil over the entire treatment period of 14 months. In contrast, the
genus Alcaligenes appeared in significant numbers only within the 10 month old landfarmed soil. Genes
encoding catechol 2,3-dioxygenase (subfamily I.2.A) were detected only in DNA of the untreated
refinery waste sludge. However, none of the genes known to encode the enzymes alkane hydroxylase
AlkB, catechol 2,3-dioxygenase (subfamily I.2.A) and naphthalene dioxygenase nahAc could be detected
in DNA of the landfarmed soils.
Abbreviations: OTUs – Operational Taxonomic Units; PCR – Polymerase chain reaction; T-RFLP –
Terminal restriction fragment length polymorphism fingerprinting
Introduction
The current knowledge about the degradation
capabilities of pollutants by bacteria is limited to
those demonstrated by cultivated microorganisms
that are only a minor fraction of bacterial diversity
and accounts for less than 1% of the naturally
occurring diversity (Amann et al. 1995; Brock
Biodegradation (2005) 16: 169–180  Springer 2005
1987). In order to gain additional information
about the bacterial communities that may play
important roles in the in-situ degradation of
petroleum hydrocarbons in contaminated soils, we
have applied a cultivation-independent strategy
for examining the community diversity and its
temporal changes in soils highly polluted with
refinery waste sludge. Cultivation-independent
methods, based mainly on molecular retrieval of
16S rRNA (rDNA) sequences, have become the
most important tools for investigating of microbial
diversity of environmental samples (Head et al.
1998; Nogales et al. 2001; Pace 1997). Nucleic acid
fingerprinting analysis of the total bacterial
diversity, by 16S rDNA T-RFLP fingerprinting
has been performed in this study to monitor resulted
changes in the community structure in onsite
field experiments (Liu et al. 1997; Osborn et al.
2000). The advantage of 16S rDNA T-RFLP is
that it is a relatively rapid profiling method and is
probably more reproducible than most other fingerprinting
methods. When the T-RFLP analyses
are carried out using PCR-amplified ribosomal
DNA with frequent cutting (i.e., four base cutting)
restriction enzymes, the level of resolution is at,
approximately, the genus level (i.e., sequence types
of organisms from different genera are able to be
differentiated) with confidence. Furthermore, rapid
profiling procedures, such as denaturing gradient
gel electrophoresis (DGGE) (Muyzer et al.
1993), temperature gradient gel electrophoresis
(TGGE) (Felske et al. 1997; Heuer et al. 1997) and
single-strand conformation polymorphism (SSCP)
analysis (Lee et al. 1996; Schwieger & Tebbe 1998),
all allow the analysis of multiple samples, but the
community fingerprints they generate do not
translate into taxonomic information.
Additionally, polymerase chain reaction (PCR)
with highly degenerate primers, based on conserved
sequence elements, was applied in the
present study as a method for the in-situ detection
of degradation genes in the soil samples of the
landfarms (Mesarch et al. 2000).
In previous studies, bacterial strains isolated
from a 4-month old landfarm and identified as
Alcaligenes sp. EK5, Enterobacter spp. EK3.1
and EK4 and Ochrobactrum sp. EK6, were observed
to degrade several classes of substrates of
petroleum hydrocarbons, such as monoaromatic,
polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs), nand
branched alkanes (Katsivela et al. 2003a, b).
In parallel, the changes in the structure of the
microbial community were assessed in parallel
with the changes of the contaminant composition
of the polluted soil for a time period of
4 months, which was the period of the highest
degradation activity (Katsivela et al. 2003a;
2004). Marked changes in the microbial community
of non-polluted soil were observed after
its pollution with petroleum waste sludge.
Operational Taxonomic Units (OTUs), based
upon 16S rDNA sequence types and originating
from the waste sludge, dominated the bacterial
community of the constructed landfarm within
the first 4 months treatment, suggesting their
metabolic superiority with respect to the degradation
of petroleum hydrocarbons. On the other
hand, a number of OTUs that were not present
in the control soil neither in the waste sludge
were obtained after 4 months of landfarm
treatment, reflecting the enrichment of bacteria
with degradation capabilities under the selective
pressure of petroleum pollution. The relative
abundance of the soil bacteria that previously
dominated the non-polluted control soil after
4 months landfarming treatment was quite low
(Katsivela et al. 2004).
In the present study, the changes in the
structure of the microbial community have been
compared with the changes of the contaminant
composition of the polluted soil in-situ and onsite
for a period of 14 months, in which the
diversity of the microbial community was decreased
with increased degradation of the
petroleum hydrocarbons contained in the landfarms.
Additionally, the abundances of the
indigenous genera Alcaligenes, Enterobacter and
Ochrobactrum were also monitored in the landfarmed
soil using T-RFLP analysis of PCRamplfied
16S rDNA during the whole treatment
period.
In parallel, PCR with highly degenerate primers
was used for the amplification of degradation
genes in the extracted genomic DNA of the soil
samples as well as in the isolated bacteria. In
particular, the PCR amplification targeted
conserved sequence elements of the degradation
enzymes alkane hydroxylase B, catechol 2,3-dioxygenase
(subfamily I.2.A) and naphthalene
dioxygenase (Hamamura et al. 2001; Hedlund
et al. 1999; Mesarch et al. 2000; Simon et al. 1993;
Smits et al. 1999).
170
Materials and methods
Sampling
Refinery sludge, before and after landfarming
treatment for 14 months, was used in this study.
The samples were collected from a landfarming
site of the petroleum refinery Motor Oil Hellas
(Korinth Refineries, Greece), specifically designed
for this project. Soil samples were collected from
the surface (0–15 cm) from: (a) an untreated, nonpolluted
control soil; (b) a newly produced refinery
waste sludge; and (c) a landfarmed site treated
with refinery waste sludge, at the beginning of the
experiment (October 2000) and after 4 (February
2001), 10 (August 2001) and 14 months treatment
(December 2001). Soil samples from the non-polluted
control soil were collected in every sampling
time and compared with the samples of the
landfarmed soil. Duplicates of all samples were
analysed directly after collection.
Hydrocarbon extraction from soil samples
The hydrocarbons present in the fresh refinery
waste sludge, as well as in the landfarming soil
samples, were separated by extraction, as
described previously (Katsivela et al. 2004).
Specifically, 2 g of soil was extracted with 140 ml
of n-hexane in a Soxhlet apparatus for 2 h. The
organic phase was concentrated by evaporation of
the organic solvent after drying over Na2SO4. The
hydrocarbon fractions were analysed, without
further purification, by gas chromatography
coupled with mass spectrometry (GC–MS) after
drying and concentration.
Analysis by GC–MS
GC–MS analyses of the petroleum hydrocarbons
were carried out on the collected samples, using a
GC 17A gas chromatograph (Shimadzu, Kyoto,
Japan), equipped with an XTI 5 column (Resteck,
Bellefonte, Pa.), as described previously (Katsivela
et al. 2003a, 2004). The QP 5000 quadrupole mass
spectrometer (Shimadzu, Kyoto, Japan) was
operated in the electron impact mode at 70 eV
with an ion source temperature of 320 C. Helium
was used as a carrier gas with a flow rate of
1.0 ml min)1
. The oven temperature was maintained
at 60 C for 2 min and then increased to
150 C at a rate of 20 C min)1
, followed by an
increase to 320 C at a rate of 6 C min)1
. Samples
of 1.0 ll were injected into the GC, operating in
the splitless mode with an injector temperature of
270 C. MS analyses were performed in the full
scan mode (50–400 m z)1
).
Isolation of DNA
DNA was extracted from soil samples (0.5 g), directly
after sampling, using the Fast DNA Spin
Kit for Soil and the protocol of the manufacturer
(Bio 101, La Jolla, CA, USA) (Borneman et al.
1996). DNA was obtained from isolated strains as
follows. Single colonies were picked from agar
medium, resuspended in 100 ll TE buffer
(10 mmol l–1 Tris, 0.1 mmol l–1 EDTA, pH 8.0)
and ‘cooked’ at 95 C for 15 min. The suspension
was centrifuged briefly, to pellet cell debris, and
1 ll of the supernatant was used for PCR ampli-
fication (Moore et al. 1999).
16S rDNA T-RFLP analyses
The terminal-restriction fragment length polymorphism
(T-RFLP) analysis was performed as
described previously by Osborn et al. (2000). The
16S rDNA was amplified, using 2.5 U of Taq
DNA polymerase (Ampli-Taq, Perkin-Elmer) and
standard reaction conditions (Moore et al. 1996,
1999), with the primers 16F63 [5¢-CAGGCCTAACACATGCAAGTC-3¢]
and 16R1389
[5¢-ACGGGCGGTGTGTACAAG-3¢]. The primer
16F63 was labelled at the 5¢ end with the
phosphoramidite dye 6 FAM. Reactions (50 ll
final volume containing 1 ll of the extracted
community DNA, 20 pmol primer and 50 lM
dNTP) were denatured initially for 2 min at 94 C,
followed by 30 cycles of: 94 C for 1 min; 55 C
for 1 min; and 72 C for 2 min; with a final
extension step of 72 C for 10 min. The PCR
products were purified using QIA-quick columns
(Qiagen, Germany) and digested with 20 U of AluI
in a total volume of 15 ll at 37 C for 3 h. This
restriction digestion (2 ll) was mixed with 2 ll of
deionised formamide, 0.5 ll of ROX-labelled
GS500 internal size standard (Applied Biosystemsl,
Inc.) and 0.5 ll of loading buffer. Samples
(1.5 ll of the denatured digest) were denaturation
at 95 C for 5 min and electrophoresed in a 5%
polyacrylamide gel, containing 7 M urea, for 6 h
171
at 3000 V on an ABI 377 genetic analyser with
filter set A and a well-to read length of 36 cm. TRFLP
profiles were analysed using the Genescan
software (version 2.1) (Applied Biosystems). The
terminal restriction fragment (T-RF) sizes, in
basepairs, were estimated by reference to the
internal standard, using the Local Southern
method. T-RFs with a peak height of less than 100
fluorescence units were excluded from analyses.
Bacterial strains
The 16S rDNA sequences of the bacterial strains
used in this study have been deposited in the
EMBL database under the following accession
number: Alcaligenes sp. strain EK5; accession
number AJ 440003; Enterobacter sp. strain EK3.1;
accession number Z76673; Enterobacter sp. strain
EK4; accession number Z76674; and Ochrobactrum
sp. strain EK6; accession number Z76675
(Katsivela et al. 2003a, b). The two Enterobacter
spp. strain EK3.1 and EK4 have been deposited at
the German Collection of Microorganisms and
Cell Cultures (DSMZ, Braunschweig, Germany)
as Enterobacter sp. strain EK3.1 DSM 15156 and
Enterobacter sp. strain EK4 DSM 15213.
Detection of degradation genes by PCR with
degenerate primers
Purified DNA was amplified, using 5 U of Taq
DNA polymerase (Qiagen Taq PCR core kit) and
standard reaction conditions, with degenerate
primers:
1. Amplification of the alcB gene was performed
by the following PCR program: initial denaturation
step consisting of 4 min at 95 C; 25
cycles consisting of denaturation at 95 C for
45 s, primer annealing at 40 C for 1 min; primer
extension at 72 C for 1 min; and elongation
at 72 C for 5 min using primers TS2S
(5¢-AAYAGAGCTCAYGARYTRGGTCAYAAG-3¢)
and deg1RE (5¢-GTGGAATTCGCRTGRTGRTCIGARTG-3¢).
The expected
length of the PCR fragment is 557 bp
(Hamamura et al. 2001; Smits et al. 1999).
2. Amplification the catechol 2,3-dioxygenase gene
(subfamily I.2.A.) was performed by the following
PCR program: initial denaturation step consisting
of 4 min at 94 C; 10 cycles consisting of
denaturation at 94 C for 45 s, primer annealing
at 60 C for 45 s and primer extension at 72 C
for 2 min; and 20 cycles consisting of denaturation
at 94 C for 45 s, primer annealing at 53 C
for 45 s and an extension at 72 C for 2 min; and
a final primer elongation at 72 C for 10 min,
using primers C23DO_R (5¢-TCAGGTCAGCACGGTCA-3¢)
and C23DO_F (5¢-
CGACCTGATCTCCATGACCGA-3¢). The
expected length of the PCR fragment is 238 bp
(Mesarch et al. 2000).
3. Amplification of the nahAc gene was performed
by the following PCR program: initial denaturation
step consisting of 4 min at 96 C; 35
cycles consisting of denaturation at minutes;
and a final primer elongation at 72 C for
7 min, using primers pPAH-F (5¢-GGYA
AYGCNAAAGAATTCGTNTGYWSHTAY
CAYGGITGGG-3¢) and pPAH-NR700 (5¢-
CCAGAATTCNGTNGTRTTHGCATCRAT
SGGRTKCCA-3¢). The expected length of the
PCR fragment is 630 bp (Hedlung et al. 1999;
Simon et al. 1993).
Amplifications were performed in a total volume
of 25.5 ll in 0.2 ml reaction tubes with a DNA
thermal cycler (mastercycler gradient, Eppendorf).
Aliquots of the PCR products were supplemented
with the dye ethidium bromide and checked by
electrophoresis in a 1% agarose gel and comparison
to a 1 kb DNA Ladder (MBI Fermentas).
Results and discussion
Changes in the petroleum composition of the soil
samples
The changes in the petroleum composition of the
landfarmed site over time were examined after
extraction of the soil samples and analysis of
petroleum contaminants by GC–MS. Figure 1
shows a typical trend for hydrocarbon degradation
during landfarming. During the 14-month period,
all n-alkanes were reduced 75 to 100% of the
original levels. Even though the percentage depletion
of each individual petroleum hydrocarbon
varied between 5 and 10% between duplicates of
samples and samples collected from different areas
of the landfarming sites. We have calculated the
remaining hydrocarbon concentration in our
analysis using the mean value of two duplicates for
every single sample.
172
Shifts in the relative abundances of the different
components were observed during landfarming.
During the first 4 months of landfarming, a rapid
depletion of long chain length (C23–C34) and
short chain length (C11–C13) compounds was
observed (depletion by more than 50%), whereas
depletion of n-alkanes with chain lengths of C18–
C22 was much less pronounced (depletion by less
than 20%).
After 10 months of landfarming treatment, a
further reduction in the concentration of all nalkanes
was observed, specifically those of medium
chain lengths, whereas residual concentrations of
longer chain length n-alkanes was only slightly
reduced further. A decrease of the n-alkanes with
chain lengths of C13–C14 and C18–C24 of more
than 50% was obtained. In parallel, a 100%
reduction of the n-alkanes with chain lengths of
C11–C12 and C31–C34 was obtained.
The n-alkane spectrum after the 14 months
landfarming treatment showed yet a further
reduction of all n-alkanes from the levels observed
after 10 months. Again, the concentrations of lowand
medium-chain length n-alkanes were reduced.
In this case, n-alkanes with chain lengths of C14–
C21 and C30 were depleted more than 50%,
whereas the n-alkane tridecane was completely
reduced. However, the amounts of n-alkanes with
chain lengths of C22–C29 were 5–35% lower than
the levels measured after the 10-month treatment
(Figure 1).
As shown in Figure 1, the highest level of
degradation of n-alkanes occurred during the first
4 months of treatment, suggesting the existence of
an active bacterial community in this period.
Kaplan & Kitts (2004) reported also a rapid degradation
of petroleum hydrocarbons in a land
treatment unit during the first period of the soil
pollution. The degradation rate is decreased during
the later phase.
Bacterial community analyses using 16S rDNA
T-RFLP fingerprinting
T-RFLP fingerprinting of PCR-amplified 16S
rDNA was used to assess the relative diversity of
the microbial communities existing in the six
investigated soil communities. DNA was extracted
from the different soil samples: (a) the non-polluted
control soil; (b) the fresh refinery waste
sludge; and (c) the landfarming soil (at the time of
its construction, after 4 months, after 10 months
Figure 1. Changes in the composition of n-alkanes in the landfarming soil. Samples were collected from soil from the landfarming site
treated with refinery waste sludge, at the beginning of the experiment and after 4, 10 and 14 months treatment.
173
and after 14 months treatment). The T-RFLP
analyses were used to compare the compositions of
the soil bacterial communities.
The similarities between the six different complex
bacterial communities were analysed, and the
origins of predominant bacterial groups were elucidated
by comparing the communities qualitatively.
Thus, the evaluation of the T-RFLP profiles
was carried out by observation of the presence or
absence of specific T-RFs. The measured community
profiles were labelled only with the ‘blue’
FAM dye at the 5¢-end of the T-RFs. The T-RFLP
fingerprints of all six soil samples were complex,
each demonstrating different profiles (Figure 2).
The overall 16S rDNA T-RFLP fingerprint patterns
of the bacterial communities in the soil of the
Figure 2. T-RFLP assessment of diversity of (a) untreated control site; (b) fresh refinery waste sludge; (c) landfarming site directly after
augmentation with waste sludge; (d) 4-month old landfarming site; (e) 10-month old landfarming site; and (f) 14-month old landfarming
site. Fragment sizes, in base pair lengths, are shown at the top of each profile, while peak heights are shown as fluorescent
units. Only the blue (shown as grey) 5¢-FAM-labelled T-RFs are shown. The peaks with the same fragment size in base pairs are
labelled with the same peak number (p1–p31) and indicate characteristic T-RFs of OTUs detected in T-RFLP profiles.
174
non-polluted control site, over the whole treatment
period, were distinct from those of the contaminated
landfarming site and were relatively unchanged
from each other. Each T-RF peak in the
community profiles indicates a different sequence
type and was used as an OTU, with an approximate
resolution level able to differentiate bacterial
genera (Osborn et al. 2000). ‘TU’ is a term, derived
from numerical taxonomy and generally applied to
strain, species or genus or other taxonomic entity
which may not necessarily be defined. With the
growing application of nucleic acid sequence data
for assessing microbial diversity, etc., the term is
used to define a sequence type that is distinct. The
exact taxonomic classification of the sequence type
may not be able to be defined with certainty.
The peaks with the same fragment sizes in the
different samples are labelled with the same
respective peak numbers (p1–p31 in Figure 2) and
indicate characteristic OTUs. The total number of
peaks (i.e., the total number of OTUs), as well as
the common peaks possessing the same fragment
sizes (i.e., the same OTU), in each T-RFLP profile
of the six different soil samples were recorded and
compared.
The T-RFLP profile from the landfarmed soil
after the 4-month treatment, which was the point
when the bacterial community exhibited the highest
degradation activity (compare with Figure 1),
was used as a reference.
The T-RFLP profiles obtained from the
landfarmed soil after 4 and 10 months of treatment
contained the highest number of OTUs
among the samples (26 and 24 different OTUs,
respectively). The T-RFLP profiles generated from
the refinery waste sludge, as well as from the
landfarmed soils directly after augmentation with
waste sludge, contained the same total number of
OTUs, (22 different OTUs), although their
compositions were different. The soil from the
non-polluted control site, as well as from the
landfarmed soil after 14 months of treatment,
contained 16 and 15 different OTUs, respectively,
indicating lower levels of diversity and complexity,
at the detection limits for the methods that were
used. Thus, it may be assumed that the lowest
bacterial diversity was indicative of soil samples
poor in carbon sources. In contrast, the microbial
communities demonstrating the highest degradation
activities after 4 and 10 months of landfarming
treatment (as shown in Figure 1) were also the
communities comprised of the highest number of
OTUs. Kaplan & Kitts (2004) reported similar
results of their investigations in a petroleum land
treatment unit at Guadalupe. The bacterial cell
counts decreased whereas the total petroleum
hydrocarbons degradation rate slowed.
Comparison of the T-RFLP profiles from the
four landfarmed soils showed six common OTUs
existing in all landfarmed soil samples, i.e., at the
beginning of the experiment, after 4, 10 and
14 months of incubation (p1, p4, p12, p17, p19
and p23). OTU number p17 of the common OTUs
was the same as that originating within the control
soil, whereas OTU number p19 was the same as
that originating from the waste sludge. Two OTUs
represented newly selected bacterial OTUs (p4 and
p23). However, only two OTUs were common in
all six community profiles (p1 and p12).
Four types of OTUs, with respect to their origins,
could be recognised in the landfarmed soils:
OTUs originating from the control soil; OTUs
originating from the waste sludge; newly selected
OTUs of low abundance in the original soil or
waste sludge, but becoming dominant in the mixture;
and OTUs existing in all T-RFLP profiles.
As described previously, the addition of waste
sludge to pristine soil resulted in dramatic changes
in the microbial community. OTUs originating
from the non-polluted control soil were reduced
dramatically, whereas OTUs originating from the
refinery waste sludge dominated the bacterial
community of the constructed landfarm after
4-month treatment (Katsivela et al. 2004). In the
present work, data from the monitoring of these
four kinds of OTUs for a treatment period of
14 months suggests a distinct influence derived
from the refinery waste sludge, an enhanced bacterial
diversity at 4 and 10 months, with a progressive
and marked selection, with decreased
diversity, at 14 months. These data suggest that
specific OTUs were associated with the different
phases of petroleum degradation in the landfarmed
soil. Figure 3 shows the relative abundances
of the four kinds of OTUs observed in the
four landfarmed soil samples with different treatment
histories. As shown in Figure 3, the relative
abundance of OTUs from the control soil did not
exhibit any significant changes over the whole
treatment time period of 14 months although the
relative intensities of some peaks suggest quantitative
changes over the landfarming treatment.
175
Surprisingly, some indigenous bacteria (i.e., the
OTUs originating from the non-polluted control
soil which survived after the pollution with refinery
waste sludge) turned out to be stable over the
whole treatment period. On the other hand, newly
selected OTUs, as well as OTUs originating from
the refinery waste sludge, dominated the bacterial
community of the constructed landfarm after 4
and 10 months treatment, which was the period
with the highest metabolic activity.
Although the relative abundance of the bacteria
originating from the refinery waste sludge increased
after augmentation, a decrease in OTU
abundance was observed over the treatment time
period of 14 months. The highest numbers of
newly selected OTUs were present in the T-RFLP
profiles at the time with the highest degradation
activity (in 4 and 10 months old landfarms), suggesting
their metabolic superiority in this period
(Figures 1 and 2).
The isolation of four bacterial strains with
degradation capabilities towards petroleum
hydrocarbons from landfarming soils was reported
previously, i.e., Alcaligenes sp. EK5, Enterobacter
spp. EK3.1 and EK4 and Ochrobactrum sp. EK6
(Katsivela et al. 2003a, b). In order to assess the
importance of members of the genera Alcaligenes,
Enterobacter and Ochrobactrum the abundances of
the characteristic T-RFs of these genera was
monitored in the T-RFLP profiles of the six soil
samples. Figure 4 shows the T-RFLPs of AluI
restriction digested 16S rDNA of: (a) the nonpolluted
control soil; (b) the fresh refinery waste
sludge; and (c) the landfarming soil after
4 months; (d) after 10 months: and (e) after
14 months treatment; as well as (f) Alcaligenes sp.
EK5. For this T-RFLP analysis we used both the
5¢ as well as the 3¢ T-RFs that are shown as blue
and green peaks, respectively.
The characteristic T-RFs of the genus Alcaligenes
were present in the community T-RFLP fingerprint
of the non-polluted control soil, as well as
in that of the 10-month old treated soil (Figure 4).
On the other hand, the characteristic T-RFs of the
genera Enterobacter and Ochrobactrum were
abundant in the T-RFLP fingerprints of the
landfarmed soil over the whole treatment period of
14 months (compare T-RFLP profiles of the soil
samples in Figure 4 with the T-RFLP profiles of
Enterobacter spp. EK3.1 and EK4 and Ochrobactrum
sp. EK6 in Figure 3 of the published data by
Katsivela et al. 2003a). The T-RFs from the genus
Figure 3. Relative abundance of the number of OTUs with different origin found in the four soil samples with different treatment
history using T-RFLP analysis.
176
Ochrobactrum were also present in the T-RFLP
fingerprint of the non-polluted control soil.
The relative abundances of the genera Alcaligenes
and Ochrobactrum in the non-polluted soil
indicates their indigenous origin. In contrast, as
described previously (Katsivela et al. 2004), Enterobacter
belongs to the bacterial genera that were
present only in the landfarmed soil samples.
Alcaligenes appears in significant numbers only
within the 10-month old landfarmed soil, whereas
Ochrobactrum and Enterobacter were present in
the landfarmed soil over the whole treatment
period of 14 months. These differences in the relative
abundances of these three bacterial genera
may be related to their metabolic capabilities of
utilisation of specific carbon sources as well as the
chemical composition of the existing petroleum
hydrocarbons in the landfarmed soils in the different
sampling periods. Kaplan & Kitts (2004)
reported also that specific phylotypes of bacteria
were associated with the different phases of
petroleum degradation in a land treatment unit.
Figure 4. T-RFLPs of AluI restriction digested 16S rDNA, to assess the bacterial diversity of (a) untreated control soil; (b) refinery
waste sludge; (c) 4-month old landfarmed soil; (d) 10-month old landfarmed soil; (e) 14-month old landfarmed soil; and (f) Alcaligenes
sp. EK5. The arrows indicate the characteristic T-RFs of the genus Alcaligenes. Fragment sizes, in base pairs, are shown at the top of
each profile, while peak heights are shown as fluorescent units. The red dye-labelled fragments indicate the GS500 DNA internal size
standard, while 5¢ and 3¢ T-RFs are shown as blue and green peaks, respectively.
177
The authors showed also that the relative abundance
of a phylotype associated with Alcaligenes
increased only temporally during the bioremediation
process.
Detection of catabolic gene sequences by PCR
DNA extracted from the soil samples: (a) an untreated,
non-polluted control soil; (b) a newly
produced refinery waste sludge; and (c) a landfarming
site treated with refinery waste sludge,
after 4 and 14 months treatment, were analysed by
PCR with degenerate primers for the presence of
genes encoding key enzymes in the degradation of
petroleum hydrocarbons. Alkane hydroxylase
AlkB, catechol 2,3-dioxygenase (subfamily I.2.A)
and naphthalene dioxygenase nahAc were used as
marker genes. Control experiments using P. oleovorans
GPo1, P. putida mt-2 (pWWO) and P.
putida G7 as strains reported to harbour alkane
hydroxylase AlkB, catechol 2,3-dioxygenase (subfamily
I.2.A) and naphthalene dioxygenase nahAc
yielded PCR fragments of the expected length of
557, 238, and 630 bp, respectively.
DNA extracted from the refinery waste sludge
showed a PCR product using catechol 2,3-dioxygenase
specific primers with a size of 238 bp
(Figure 5, lane 3). This result suggests the presence
of bacteria containing catechol 2,3-dioxygenase
(subfamily I.2.A), which is an enzyme involved in
the degradation of a large group of aromatic
compounds. Also, a PCR product generated using
the primers for alkane hydroxylase AlkB was
obtained from the DNA extracted from the refinery
waste sludge. However, the size of the PCR
product (485 bp) differed significantly from the
one expected (630 bp), indicating the absence of
alkane hydroxylase genes in the tested soils. Surprisingly,
none of the other analysed soil samples
showed any positive PCR products. The lack of
PCR products of the alkane hydroxylase AlkB
gene, contrasts the active degradation of n-alkanes
in the landfarmed soils, and may suggest that the
degrading bacteria contain alkane oxidation enzyme
systems that are unrelated or only distantly
related to AlkB. Alternatively, potential PCR
inhibitors coextracted with DNA, non-amplifying
DNA, soil factors (humics), and soil pollutants
(petroleum hydrocarbons) could have disturbed
the PCR detection of the reported genes.
Besides DNA extracted from the soil samples,
four bacterial strains with degradation capabilities,
Alcaligenes sp. EK5, Enterobacter spp. EK3.1 and
EK4 and Ochrobactrum sp. EK6, previously isolated
from the landfarms (Katsivela et al. 2003a,
b), were also analysed by the same PCR approach.
None of the four analysed bacterial strains showed
any PCR product for the genes encoding alkane
hydroxylase AlkB, catechol 2,3-dioxygenase (subfamily
I.2.A) and naphthalene dioxygenase nahAc.
The lack of the expected PCR products of the
three tested degradation genes in genomic DNA of
the four isolated bacteria may be due to existence
of gene sequences completely different from those
characterised from bacteria of the genus Pseudomonas.
Alternatively, these bacteria may contain
genes homologues in which the regions that were
used to develop the primers were not so well
conserved.
