B84
Microbial Degradation of Alkyl Carbazoles in Norman Wells Crude
Oil
PHILLIP M. FEDORAK AND DONALD W. S. WESTLAKE*
Department of Microbiology, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada T6G 2E9
Received 26 September 1983/Accepted 24 January 1984
Norman Wells crude oil was fractionated by sequential alumina and silicic acid column chromatography
methods. The resulting nitrogen-rich fraction was analyzed by gas chromatography-mass spectrometry and
showed 26 alkyl (Cl to C5) carbazoles to be the predominant compounds. An oil-degrading mixed bacterial
culture was enriched on carbazole to enhance its ability to degrade nitrogen heterocycles. This culture was
used to inoculate a series of flasks of mineral medium and Norman Wells crude oil. Residual oil was
recovered from these cultures after incubation at 25°C for various times. The nitrogen-rich fraction was
analyzed by capillary gas chromatography, using a nitrogen-specific detector. Most of the Cl-, C2-, and C3-
carbazoles and one of the C4-isomers were degraded within 8 days. No further degradation occurred when
incubation was extended to 28 days. The general order of susceptibility of the isomers to biodegradation was
C1 > C2 > C3 > C4. The carbazole-enriched culture was still able to degrade n-alkanes, isoprenoids,
aromatic hydrocarbons, and sulfur heterocycles in the crude soil.
Crude oil is an extremely complex mixture of organic
compounds. When introduced into the environment, it provides
a variety of substrates for the indigenous microbial
population. An increased understanding of the ability of
microorganisms to change the chemical composition of oil
has been gained as new analytical methods have been
applied to study residual oil from laboratory experiments.
Examples of such analytical techniques include computerized
mass spectrometry (23), 13C nuclear magnetic resonance
spectometry (11), capillary gas chromatography (GC)
(5), and capillary GC coupled with a sulfur-specific detector
(7). The analyses of oil from environmental samples have
also shown chemical changes due, to a large extent, to
microbial activity (2, 21, 25, 26). Early investigations focused
on losses of the n-alkanes (1, 12), whereas more recent
work has considered the aromatic compounds (5, 17) and the
sulfur heterocycles (7). However, there is very little information
on the ability of microorganisms to degrade the nitrogen
compounds in oil.
Petroleum contains between 0.1 and 2% nitrogen (20),
with most crude oils containing less than 0.3% (22). The
three major groups of nitrogen compounds in petroleum
fractions boiling below 538°C (1,000°F) are pyridine derivatives
(including quinolines and phenanthridines), indole
derivatives (including pyrroles, carbazoles, and benzocarbazoles),
and aromatic amides (19). Although nitrogen-containing
compounds can be found throughout the boiling ranges,
there is a tendency for such components to be found in the
higher-boiling fractions and residues. Oils of high American
Petroleum Institute gravity tend to have higher nitrogen
contents than those with low gravities. The presence of
nitrogen compounds in oils can lead to the poisoning of
catalysts used in the cracking of oil for commercial uses (20).
As the availability of high-quality, low-boiling crude oils
decreases, the trend is to the increased use of oils containing
more nitrogen.
Many authors have used enrichment cultures to isolate
procaryotes that are capable of degrading pure nitrogen
heterocycles. For example, Watson and Cain (24) have
Corresponding author.
858
described the metabolism of pyridine by a Bacillus sp. and a
Nocardia sp., both of which use this compound as a sole
carbon, nitrogen, and energy source. Stafford and Callely
(D. A. Stafford and A. G. Callely, J. Gen. Microbiol. 63:xiv,
1970) reported on a gram-negative isolate which can grow on
pyridine and 4-methylpyridine but not on the 2-methyl or 3-
methyl isomers. Quinoline served as the sole carbon source
when ammonium was present as a nitrogen source for a
bacterium isolated by Grant and Al-Najiar (9). Finnerty et al.
(8) have reported studies on four bacterial isolates able to
use carbazole as their sole source of carbon, nitrogen, and
energy.
In laboratory studies, Bohonos et al. (3) have used waters
from lakes, streams, and sewage plants as sources of inocula.
When added to six water samples, carbazole was biodegraded
in five of these, quinoline in all six, and benzo[f]quinoline
in two. The addition of quinoline along with
benzoUWquinoline yielded degradation of the latter compound
in all six waters tested. Dibenzo[c,g]carbazole was
not degraded when tested alone or with inducing compounds
(carbazole or naphthalene) present.
DeLeon et al. (4) have compared fresh unweathered oil
from the Ixtoc-1 blowout with heavily weathered oil from
that source. Qualitatively, the nitrogen heterocycle profiles
were almost identical, and they concluded that weathering
does not adversely affect the distribution of higher-molecular-weight
azaarenes such as C3- and C4-phenathridinesbenzoquinolines.
Norman Wells crude oil, which was used for this study,
contains a variety of alkyl carbazoles. This paper presents a
method for analyzing these compounds and describes their
sequential degradation by mixed microbial populations. The
residual oil from laboratory cultures was separated by column
chromatography to give a nitrogen-rich fraction which
was initially characterized by GC-mass spectrometry and
then routinely analyzed by capillary GC, using a nitrogenspecific
detector.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Sources of inocula and culture methods. In 1973, beach
material which had been contaminated with aviation fuel was
 on June 21, 2017 by INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY NEW DELHI http://aem.asm.org/ Downloaded from 
DEGRADATION OF ALKYL CARBAZOLES 859
collected from the shore of Shell Lake, Northwest Territories,
Canada. At that time, 10 g was added to 1 liter of
sterile mineral medium (2 g of Na2SO4, 0.2 g of
MgSO4 * 7H20, 0.5 g of K2HPO4, 1 g of NH4Cl, 2 g of
KNO3, and a trace of FeSO4 per liter of distilled water) and
adjusted to pH 7.4 before autoclaving. Then 1 ml of Prudhoe
Bay crude oil was added, and the culture was incubated at
30°C on a rotary shaker (250 rpm; eccentricity, 3.8 cm). This
enrichment culture has been maintained since that time by
monthly transfers into fresh mineral medium and oil. Several
months before the start of this study, a 10% inoculum was
added to 200 ml of mineral medium containing 100 mg of
carbazole. This new enrichment culture was incubated at
25°C on a rotary shaker and transferred every 2 weeks to
fresh mineral medium with carbazole as the sole carbon
source.
The carbazole-enriched culture served as a source of
inoculum for a time course biodegradation experiment.
Aliquots (20 ml) of this culture were added to 14 flasks
containing 200 ml of mineral medium and 0.2 ml of Norman
Wells crude oil. After various times of incubation at 25°C (0,
1, 2, 4, 6, 8, and 28 days), the residual oil from two flasks was
extracted and combined for analysis. Controls containing
Norman Wells crude oil and 200 ml of sterile mineral
medium were incubated and extracted at each time to
account for any substrate loss due to volatilization.
The original oil-degrading culture described above, which
had not been enriched on carbazole, was also tested for its
ability to degrade the nitrogen heterocycles in Norman Wells
crude oil. We added 20 ml of this culture to two flasks
containing 200 ml of mineral medium and 0.2 ml of oil. These
were incubated at 25°C on a shaker for 28 days, and the
residual oil was extracted for analysis.
Extraction, fractionation, and analyses of oil fractions.
Before extraction, 23 ,ul of a methylene chloride solution
containing 134 mg of 7,8-benzoquinoline per ml (Aldrich
Chemical Co., Inc.) as a GC standard was added to each
culture flask. The medium was extracted at neutral pH,
dried, and concentrated as outlined by Fedorak and Westlake
(5). The concentrated extracts from duplicate flasks
were combined and adsorbed onto 3 g of neutral alumina.
This was added to 6 g of neutral alumina in a chromatography
column (30 by 1.1 cm) and developed sequentially with
30 ml of hexane, 50 ml of benzene, and 70 ml of chloroform
to give, respectivley, the saturate, aromatic, and nitrogen
polycyclic aromatic (NPAC) fractions as described by Later
et al. (15). The NPAC fraction was passed through a silicic
acid column (15), and the secondary nitrogen polycyclic
aromatic heterocycles (2°-PANH) were eluted with 70 ml of
hexane-benzene (1:1).
After the solvents had been removed under vacuum, the
three fractions were analyzed by capillary GC techniques.
The conditions used for the analysis of the aromatic fraction
with simultaneous, specific detection of the sulfur heterocycles
were given by Fedorak and Westlake (7). The saturates
and nitrogen heterocycles were analyzed with a HewlettPackard
(model 5710) GC with a modified injection port (18)
into which two SE52 wall-coated, fused silica columns (25 m
by 0.2 mm) were fitted. The outlet end of one column was
attached to a flame ionization detector, and the outlet of the
other was attached to a nitrogen-specific detector. The
injection port and detectors were at 300°C. The saturates
were chromatographed by using the following oven temperature
program: 90°C for 4 min, 4°C per min to 270°C, which
was held for 12 min. The temperature program used for the
nitrogen heterocycle analysis was 170 to 270°C at 2°C per
min. Helium was used as a carrier and a make-up gas. Peak
heights from the nitrogen-specific detector were used to
quantitate the alkyl carbazoles (14).
The most abundant nitrogen-containing compounds in the
NPAC fraction of a Norman Wells oil sample, which were
amenable to capillary GC analysis, were identified by GCmass
spectrometry. This analysis was done by using a DB-1
capillary column in a Varian 3700 GC in series with a
Finnigan System MAT212 mass spectrometer linked to a
Finnigan data system.
Nitrogen contents of the whole oil and the 2°-PANH were
determined by the microanalytical laboratory in the Department
of Chemistry, University of Alberta.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Norman Wells crude oil was found to contain 0.25%
nitrogen. The 2°-PANH fraction of unaltered oil made up
4.0% of the weight of the crude oil and contained 1.42%
nitrogen. This nitrogen-rich fraction, which was used for GC
analyses, contained 22.7% of the nitrogen present in the
crude oil.
GC-mass spectrometry analysis of the NPAC fraction of
Norman Wells oil showed that major nitrogen compounds
gave the molecular ion series mlz = 181, 195, 209, 223, and
237. These correspond to either alkyl (Cl to C5) carbazoles
or azafluorenes (4). There were no detectable amounts of
quinolines, benzoquinolines, their alkyl homologs, or carbazole.
Fractionation of the NPAC fraction on a silicic acid
column verified that only alkyl carbazoles were present.
Later et al. (15) showed that the alkyl carbazoles eluted with
50 ml of hexane-benzene (1:1) as part of the 2°-PANH
fraction. However, more polar solvents (benzene, then
benzene-ethyl ether) were required to elute azaarenes such
as benzoquinolines, quinolines, and azafluorenes. GC analysis
of the NPAC and the 2°-PANH fractions with the
nitrogen-specific detector gave nearly identical chromatograms.
Analysis of the benzene fraction from the silicic acid
column showed that there were some alkyl carbazoles left
after the 50 ml of hexane-benzene, but no other resolvable
nitrogen compounds were present. The benzene-ethyl ether
fraction showed no peaks when analyzed with the nitrogenspecific
detector.
We found that 70 ml of hexane-benzene (1:1) removed all
of the alkyl carbazoles and 7,8-benzoquinoline (the GC
standard) from the column, and this volume was routinely
used for elution of silicic acid columns in this study. After
the initial GC-mass spectrometry analysis, the loss of the
nitrogen heterocycles was monitored by GC analyses, using
the nitrogen-specific detector.
Although the NPAC fraction can be analyzed by our
capillary GC method, it contains materials which are nonvolatile,
and these remain as contaminants in the injection port
liner. The silicic acid column removed much of the browncolored
materials, but it did not completely eliminate the
problem of injection port contamination. The liner had to be
cleaned and replaced frequently so that the resolution of the
alkyl carbazole peaks could be maintained. The 2°-PANH
fraction did not contain exclusively nitrogen compounds
since GC analysis with the flame ionization detector showed
the presence of compounds which were not visualized with
the nitrogen-specific detector. In contrast, Later et al. (15,
16), who were analyzing distillates of synthetic fuels rather
than crude oils, found nearly identical flame ionization and
nitrogen-specific detector traces from their silicic acid column
effluents.
VOL. 47, 1984
 on June 21, 2017 by INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY NEW DELHI http://aem.asm.org/ Downloaded from 
860 FEDORAK AND WESTLAKE
The 2°-PANH fraction recovered from Norman Wells
crude oil after 28 days of incubation in sterile mineral
medium is shown as the control in Fig. 1. This profile was
identical to that of the 2°-PANH fraction from the native
crude oil, indicating that none of these compounds were
volatile under the incubation conditions used. Repeated
attempts to detect viable microorganisms in the oil-containing
controls failed, indicating that the Norman Wells crude
oil contained no organisms that would attack the oil under
the growth conditions used in these experiments.
Twenty-six alkyl carbazoles were detected by GC-mass
spectrometry, and these peaks have been grouped on the
basis of their molecular weights (control, Fig. 1). Within a
group of isomers, the peaks are numbered sequentially as
their retention times increase. Thus, this oil contains three
isomers of C1-carbazole, eight isomers of C2-carbazole,
-I C3-0
FIG. 1. Comparison of alkyl carbazole-degrading capabilities of
an oil-degrading enrichment culture and the carbazole-enriched
culture after 28 days of incubation. The 2°-PANH fraction of
Norman Wells oil was analyzed with a nitrogen-specific detector.
Numbered peaks are alkyl carbazoles; others are unidentified. BQ,
7,8-Benzoquinoline (GC standard); CA, carbazole (introduced with
the inoculum); C,, i alkyl carbon atoms on carbazole; X, contaminating
peak.
and so on. The nitrogen-specific detector readily responds to
12 ng of the GC standard 7,8-benzoquinoline (labeled BQ)
(Fig. 1). The 26 numbered peaks in the control chromatogram
(Fig. 1) represent 110 pLg of alkyl carbazoles found in
the recovered, undegraded Norman Wells crude oil and
make up 0.04% by weight of the oil. Grimmer et al. (10)
found alkyl carbazoles to be approximately 0.02% by weight
of a Qatar crude oil.
During initial investigations of the degradation of the alkyl
carbazoles, cultures were acidified and extracted as in our
previous studies (5, 7). This, however, led to the appearance
of several unidentified, foreign nitrogenous compounds in
the GC traces which complicated interpretation of the results.
This problem was to a large extent overcome by
extracting the cultures at neutrality. Occasionally, foreign
peaks were observed; these are marked "X" in the figure.
Table 1 shows the sequential loss of the alkyl carbazoles
by the carbazole-enriched, oil-degrading mixed population.
After only 1 day of incubation, degradation of some of the
nitrogen heterocycles was apparent. A contaminating nitrogen
compound masked peaks 2 and 3 in the C1 region in the
day 1 sample, but peak 1 had been removed and therefore
the loss was reported as .45%. Also within the first day,
30% of the C2 carbazoles were removed from the oil. Losses
measured at .10% were not considered significant and were
reported as "ND." By day 2, most (86%) of the C1-
carbazoles were removed from the oil and 53% of the C2-
carbazoles had been degraded. Loss of the C3 isomers was
detected on day 4, and by day 6 degradation of some of the
C4-carbazoles was observed. The maximum loss of alkyl
carbazoles was observed after 8 days, and no further degradation
occurred during the next 20 days of incubation. There
was no detectable loss of the C5-carbazoles over the 28-day
incubation period.
These results indicate that the mixed microbial population
which had been enriched on carbazole as its sole carbon
source was capable of degrading many of the alkyl carbazoles
in Norman Wells crude oil. In general, the lower the
number of alkyl carbons on the carbazole ring, the more
susceptible the compound was to biodegradation. That is,
the C1 compounds were degraded before the C2 compounds,
which were degraded before the C3 compounds,
and so on. This trend has also been observed for alkylsubstituted
aromatic hydrocarbons (6) and for alkyl-substituted
sulfur heterocycles (7).
The data in Fig. 1 compare the alkyl carbazole-degrading
capabilities of the carbazole enrichment culture with those of
the non-carbazole-enriched, oil-degrading culture from
which it was derived. After 28 days of incubation, the oildegrading
culture has removed the Cr- and most of the C2-
carbazoles from the oil, but there has been little activity on
the C3 and C4 isomers. However, most of the C3-carbazoles
and peak 2 in the C4 region had been removed or
diminished by the carbazole enrichment culture. Thus, the
prior exposure to carbazole increased the ability of the
mixed culture to utilize a wider range of the alkyl carbazoles.
The actual time or number of transfers on carbazole-containing
medium required to enhance this activity likely was less
than the several months used in this study. The enrichment
culture was maintained while the analytical method was
being developed.
The carbazole-enriched culture was also able to degrade a
wide range of non-nitrogen compounds in the Norman Wells
crude oil. These included the n-alkanes and isoprenoids
(pristane and phytane) present in the saturate fraction and
many compounds in the aromatic fraction such as naphthaAPPL.
ENVIRON. MICROBIOL.
 on June 21, 2017 by INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY NEW DELHI http://aem.asm.org/ Downloaded from 
DEGRADATION OF ALKYL CARBAZOLES 861
TABLE 1. Percent loss of alkyl carbazoles from Norman Wells
crude oil during incubation with a carbazole-degrading enrichment
culture
Incubation % Loss of isomer of carbazole:
time (days) C, C2 3 C4 C5
1 245a 30 NDb ND ND
2 86 53 ND ND ND
4 90 88 33 ND ND
6 84 95 66 16 ND
8 90 97 86 32 ND
28 85 96 89 30 ND
a Peak 1 (see Fig. 1) was completely lost. A contaminating peak
found only on day 1 masked peaks 2 and 3 in the C1 region.
b ND, No loss detected.
lene, C1-, C2-, and C3-naphthalenes, phenanthrene, and C1-
phenanthrenes. Many sulfur heterocycles were present in
this crude oil, and Table 2 compares their sequential degradation
with that of the alkyl carbazoles. The carbazoleenriched
culture attacked the alkyl carbazoles more readily
than the sulfur heterocyles. After 2 days of incubation,
isomers of the C1- and C2-carbazoles were degraded, but
there had been no change in the sulfur heterocycle chromatogram.
By day 4, the C2- and C3-benzothiophenes,
dibenzothiophene (the sulfur analog of carbazole), and the
C1-dibenzothiophenes had been removed from the oil. During
the same interval, several C2- and C3-carbazoles were
degraded, and by day 6, most of the C3-carbazoles had been
removed. The degradation of the more complex alkyl dibenzothiophenes
lagged behind that of the alkyl carbazoles since
8 days of incubation were needed to remove the C2-dibenzothiophenes,
whereas the C2-carbazoles were removed in 4
days. By day 28, some of the C3-dibenzothiophene isomers
had been degraded. The enrichment on carbazole also appears
to have enhanced the ability to degrade the sulfur
heterocycles. For example, the C2-dibenzothiophenes were
completely removed from the oil by day 8 by the carbazoleenriched
culture (Table 2), whereas these were still present
on day 28 in the residual oil from the oil-degrading enrichment
culture which had not been enriched or carbazole.
The intermediates and end products of the metabolism of
these carbazoles are at present unknown. Since the alkyl
carbazoles make up only 0.04% of the weight of the oil,
detection of any intermediates in the oil matrix was not
attempted. Finnerty et al. (8) have detected a minimum of six
unidentified, water-soluble compounds on thin-layer chroTABLE
2. Degradation of alkyl carbazoles and sulfur
heterocycles in Norman Wells crude oil incubated with the
carbazole-enriched mixed culture
Day Carbazoles degradeda Sulfur heterocycles degraded
1 C1, peak 1 NCb
C2, peaks 1,3,4
2 C1, peaks 2,3 NC
4 C2, peaks 2,5,6,7,8 C2- and C3-benzothiophenes,
C3, peaks 3,5 DBTC and C1 DBTs
6 C3, peaks 1,2,4,6 NC
8 C4, peak 2 C2 DBTs
28 NC Some isomers of C3 DBT
a See control chromatogram in Fig. 1 for peak designations.
b NC, No change.
c DBT, Dibenzothiophene.
matography plates after growing their isolate C4 on carbazole.
Work with dibenzothiophene, the sulfur analog of
carbazole, has shown that the products formed from its
metabolism still have the benzothiophene rings intact (13).
However, in the case of the nitrogen heterocycle, it is quite
possible that the pyrrole ring is broken, since the four
carbazole degraders isolated by Finnerty et al. (8) also use
this compound as a nitrogen source.
The data presented in this paper show that mixed microbial
populations are capable of degrading a wide variety of
alkyl carbazoles in a crude oil. Although such compouhds
are present in only small quantities in crude oils, their
susceptibilities toward microbial attack have not previously
been reported. It is likely that the same degradation sequence
(but not the same rate) would be observed in
environments that have received acute crude oil contaminations.
The presence of nitrogen compounds in petroleum refinery
feed stocks is known to poison catalysts (20); therefore,
their selective removal from petroleum is desirable. Finnerty
et al. (8) have only reported on the removal of carbazole
from oils spiked with that compound. Our findings indicate
that a range of alkyl carbazoles may also be susceptible to
such a microbial denitrogenation process.
