B91
Bethanie R Edwards1, Christopher M Reddy1
, Richard Camilli2,
Catherine A Carmichael1, Krista Longnecker1 and
Benjamin A S Van Mooy1
1 Department of Marine Chemistry and Geochemistry, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution,
Woods Hole, USA
2 Department of Applied Ocean Physics and Engineering, Woods Hole Oceanographic
Institution, Woods Hole, USA
E-mail: bvanmooy@whoi.edu
Received 18 April 2011
Accepted for publication 14 July 2011
Published 3 August 2011
Online at stacks.iop.org/ERL/6/035301
Abstract
The Deepwater Horizon oil spill was one of the largest oil spills in history, and the fate of this
oil within the Gulf of Mexico ecosystem remains to be fully understood. The goal of this
study—conducted in mid-June of 2010, approximately two months after the oil spill
began—was to understand the key role that microbes would play in the degradation of the oil in
the offshore oligotrophic surface waters near the Deepwater Horizon site. As the utilization of
organic carbon by bacteria in the surface waters of the Gulf had been previously shown to be
phosphorus limited, we hypothesized that bacteria would be unable to rapidly utilize the oil
released from the Macondo well. Although phosphate was scarce throughout the sampling
region and microbes exhibited enzymatic signs of phosphate stress within the oil slick,
microbial respiration within the slick was enhanced by approximately a factor of five. An
incubation experiment to determine hydrocarbon degradation rates confirmed that a large
fraction of this enhanced respiration was supported by hydrocarbon degradation. Extrapolating
our observations to the entire area of the slick suggests that microbes had the potential to
degrade a large fraction of the oil as it arrived at the surface from the well. These observations
decidedly refuted our hypothesis. However, a concomitant increase in microbial abundance or
biomass was not observed in the slick, suggesting that microbial growth was nutrient limited;
incubations amended with nutrients showed rapid increases in cell number and biomass, which
supported this conclusion. Our study shows that the dynamic microbial community of the Gulf
of Mexico supported remarkable rates of oil respiration, despite a dearth of dissolved nutrients.
Keywords: microbial respiration, Deepwater Horizon, oil spill, hydrocarbon degradation, Gulf
of Mexico, petroleum hydrocarbon
1. Introduction
On 20 April 2010 the Deepwater Horizon drilling platform
experienced an explosion which resulted in 11 fatalities and an
uncontrolled release of oil from the Macondo well at a depth
of 1544 m. Ultimately, over 600 million liters of oil were
released (Deepwater Horizon Unified Command 2010). Oil
released from the wellhead ascended through the water column
forming both a hydrocarbon plume at approximately 1100 m
and a vast slick on the surface. Several reports have focused on
the microbial degradation of hydrocarbons in the deep plume
(Camilli et al 2010, Hazen et al 2010, Valentine et al 2010,
1748-9326/11/035301+09$33.00 1 © 2011 IOP Publishing Ltd Printed in the UK
Environ. Res. Lett. 6 (2011) 035301 B R Edwards et al
Table 1. Core data from stations occupied in June 2010 near the Deepwater Horizon (DWH) site. A dashed line (—) denotes that samples
were not collected for that particular measurement. The parameters measured are abbreviated as follows: P = phosphate, R = respiration,
RI = respiration with inorganic nutrient amendments, PL = polar membrane lipid concentrations, PLI = polar membrane lipid
concentrations in inorganic nutrient amendments, E = enzyme activity (lipase and alkaline phosphatase), H = hydrocarbon degradation
incubations, C = cell counts, CI = cell counts in inorganic nutrient amendments. Station names are also given for reference to our previously
published work from this cruise (Camilli et al 2010).
Station name
Station name
(Camilli et al
2010)
Latitude
(
◦N)
Longitude
(
◦W)
Distance
from well
(km)
Date of
sampling
Phosphate
(nmol l−1)
Water
temp (◦C)
Parameters
measured
DWH DWH 28.74 88.39 0 — — — —
O-1 DT1 28.22 87.44 109 06/18/10 — — R, E
O-2 DT2 28.35 88.38 43.0 06/18/10 — — R
O-3 EN01 28.37 88.39 41.0 06/19/10 8.89 28.5 P, PL, E, C
O-4 EN02 28.60 88.54 23.4 06/19/10 — 27.7 PL, E, C
O-5 EN03 28.63 88.56 22.3 06/20/10 11.3 27.8 P, C
O-6 EN04 28.67 88.58 22.5 06/20/10 5.33 26.8 P, C
O-7 EN21 28.36 88.39 41.6 06/28/10 15.4 29.6 P, R, PL, E, C
I-1 EN05 28.74 88.41 4.16 06/20/10 — 28.2 R, RI, H, PL, E, C, CI
I-2 EN07 28.75 88.38 1.84 06/21/10 12.1 29.3 P, PL, E, C
I-3 EN08 28.73 88.35 1.69 06/21/10 9.67 29.4 P, PL, C
I-4 EN10 28.74 88.43 6.62 06/22/10 — 29.9 R, RI, PL, PLI, E, CI
I-5 EN20 28.73 88.39 2.09 06/28/10 10.7 29.6 P, R, RI, PL, E
Kessler et al 2011), but the goal of this study was to examine
the microbial degradation of oil in the surface waters in close
proximity to the Deepwater Horizon site.
It is well documented that microbes can respond quickly to
the addition of petroleum hydrocarbons, aiding in degradation
and remediation (Cappello et al 2007 and references therein;
Prince 2010 and references therein). However, while surface
waters on the continental shelf of the Gulf of Mexico and
the Mississippi river plume are rich in inorganic nutrients, the
offshore waters of the Gulf of Mexico near the Deepwater
Horizon site are oligotrophic. Bacterial production and
respiration of organic carbon in this region have been observed
to be limited by the availability of phosphate, an essential
nutrient (Pomeroy et al 1995). In amendment experiments
conducted by Pomeroy et al (1995) in the same region of the
Gulf of Mexico as the Deepwater Horizon spill, microbes were
unable to respire exogenous glucose without the addition of
inorganic nutrients. These observations would predict that the
microbial response to the oil from the Macondo well would
be minimal, especially since the hydrophobic compounds
that compose oil (Peters et al 2005 and references therein)
play a comparatively less essential role in cellular physiology
than the simple sugar glucose. Additionally, it has been
recognized for several decades that the availability of nutrients
can markedly affect the rate of microbial oil degradation (Atlas
1981, Leahy and Colwell 1990, Prince 2010 and references
therein). Thus we hypothesized that the microbial community
of the oligotrophic offshore surface waters of the Gulf of
Mexico would be unable to rapidly respond to the large pulse of
highly reduced organic carbon from the oil spill due to intense
nutrient limitation.
Surface-water samples were collected at twelve stations
near the Deepwater Horizon site in mid-June of 2010, seven
stations outside the slick and five stations within the slick.
These stations are the same as those reported in our previous
publications on the subsurface plume of hydrocarbons (Camilli
et al 2010, Reddy et al 2011; table 1). Community respiration
rates, lipase enzyme activities, microbial abundances, and
microbial biomass were examined at stations inside and
outside of the surface oil slick to better constrain how
the microbial community responded to the introduction of
crude oil. Alkaline phosphatase activities and phosphate
concentrations were determined in situ to assess phosphate
limitation. Inorganic amendment experiments were also
conducted to test whether community respiration and microbial
cell production in the slick was limited by nutrients as we
had hypothesized. Additionally hydrocarbon degradation rates
were determined in incubations, which in conjunction with
community respiration rates, were used to further constrain the
fate of oil released to surface waters.
2. Methodology
2.1. Sampling
Our cruise aboard the R/V Endeavor was conducted between
19 and 28 June 2010 (table 1). Water samples were
collected from the surface mixed layer (<15 m) using GoFlo
bottles, which are underwater sampling bottles that stay
closed until triggered at depth to prevent contamination from
surface waters. These bottles were maintained free of oil
contamination as described (Reddy et al 2011). Five stations
were occupied within the oil surface slick (I-1 through I-5) and
seven sites were occupied outside of the slick (O-1 through
O-7). The stations inside the slick were generally in close
proximity to the Macondo well (within 1.7–6.6 km; table 1)
and were characterized by the presence of oil on or below the
surface that was plainly identifiable by visual inspection over
the rail of the ship. The stations outside the slick were south
and southeast of the well site, which was generally upwind of
the well site during our cruise, and no oil was visible at the
surface.
2
Environ. Res. Lett. 6 (2011) 035301 B R Edwards et al
2.2. Phosphate measurements
Water from the Go-Flo bottles was collected in 50 ml highdensity
polyethylene Nalgene bottles, and kept frozen until
analysis. Samples were collected from four stations outside
the slick and three stations within the slick (table 1). At
several stations, sampling for other analyses took precedent
and insufficient water was available to collect a sample
for phosphate analysis. Water samples were thawed at
room temperature, dissolved phosphate was pre-concentrated
using magnesium induced co-precipitation (MAGIC), and then
quantified using a molybdate-blue colorimetric method (Karl
and Tien 1992).
2.3. Respiration rates
Respiration rates for whole seawater were determined using
bottle incubations where oxygen concentrations were tracked
over approximately 36 h. Incubations were conducted in
triplicate at three stations outside the slick and three stations
within the slick; incubations amended with nutrients were
also conducted (section 2.8). In addition, a separate set
of triplicate six-day incubations was conducted in parallel
with incubations tracking hydrocarbons (section 2.4). Glass
biological oxygen demand bottles were equipped with oxygen
optode spot minisensors (PreSens) that were glued to the
inside surface of the bottle using food-quality silicone cement.
Prior to use on our cruise, bottles were soaked for nearly
three months in distilled water that was exchanged every few
weeks (in anticipation of a different, previously scheduled
cruise). Immediately before the R/V Endeavor cruise, the
bottles were rinsed three times with methanol, three times
with 5% hydrochloric acid, and three times with 18 M
Milli-Q water. The bottles were then rinsed three times with
sample seawater immediately prior to use. This rinsing routine
was repeated at sea between each set of incubations. The
incubations were initiated by transferring seawater to the glass
bottles using standard gas sampling techniques. These bottles
were then placed in a shaking incubator that was maintained
at in situ temperatures in the dark. The oxygen minisensors
were then monitored every few hours over the course of
approximately 36 h using the manufacturer’s Minisensor Meter
(PreSens). To eliminate temperature changes that impact
sensor stability, the bottles were left in the incubator with the
lid closed and the fiber optic lead from the minisensor meter
was threaded through a small hole in the incubator lid. Using
this technique, we could confidently measure respiration rates
of <1 μmol O2 l
−1 d−1. At the beginning of the cruise, each
sensor spot was calibrated and sensor stability was assessed
over a 36 h incubation with Milli-Q water to assure drift of
<0.1 μmol O2 l
−1 d−1.
2.4. Hydrocarbon degradation incubations
At station I-1, a longer-term incubation was conducted in
order to constrain hydrocarbon degradation (table 1). We
filled four 1 liter Teflon bottles with seawater, and three
of these were immediately poisoned with mercuric chloride
in order to afford replicate characterizations of the surface
slick. The remaining incubation was allowed to incubate for
six days in the dark at approximately in situ temperatures
before also being poisoned with mercuric chloride. Upon
return to the laboratory, all four sample bottles were extracted
with dichloromethane and analyzed with an Agilent 6890
gas chromatograph (GC) equipped with a flame ionization
detector using standard protocols (Lemkau et al 2010). Since
many compounds in oil are not amenable to GC analysis, the
concentrations (mg l−1) we report are effectively minimum
estimates. Hence, we integrated and measured the total
petroleum hydrocarbon signal as well as individual compounds
such as octadecane (n-C18) and phytane that are used as
indicators of biodegradation. The degradation rate of total
hydrocarbons (mg l−1 d−1) was converted to oxygen units
(μmol O2 l
−1 d−1) as described (Camilli et al 2010, Reddy
et al 2011). Parallel six-day incubations for total respiration
were also conducted, as described in section 2.3.
2.5. Enzymatic activity
Microbial alkaline phosphatase and lipase activities were
assayed by observing the hydrolysis product of the commonly
used fluorogenic substrates 4-methylumbelliferyl (MUF)-
phosphate and MUF-butyrate (Sigma-Aldrich) in seawater
incubations (Hoppe 1993). Aliquots of whole seawater were
placed in 96-well plates, and the fluorescent substrates were
added to initiate the assays. Fluorescence was measured
at regular intervals with a CytoFluor Series 4000 multi-well
plate reader, and increased linearly with time as expected.
Using standard MUF additions and an external standard curve,
fluorescence readings were converted to concentration units.
Enzyme hydrolysis rates were calculated from the linear
increase in MUF concentrations over time during the assays.
The saturating concentrations of the enzyme substrates were
determined at station O-2, and found to be 25 μmol l−1; this
concentration was used in all assays conducted at all of the
other stations. Enzyme activity was assessed at three stations
within the slick and three stations outside the slick (table 1).
2.6. Polar membrane lipid concentrations
One liter seawater samples were filtered through a 0.22 μm
pore size Durapore (Millipore) membrane filter under gentle
vacuum. The filters were snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen
and transported back to the laboratory in a cryogenic
dry shipper. One sample was taken at three stations
outside the slick, and five stations within the slick. In
addition, samples for polar membrane lipids were collected
from the amendment experiments conducted at station I-4
(section 2.8; table 1). Lipids were extracted from
the filters using a modified Bligh and Dyer method as
described (Van Mooy and Fredricks 2010). Phospholipid
(phosphatidylglycerol, PG; phosphatidylethanolamine, PE;
and phosphatidylcholine, PC) and sulfolipid concentrations
(sulfoquinovosyldiacylglycerol, SQDG) were analyzed by
high performance liquid chromatography/mass spectrometry
(HPLC/MS) using a Hewlett Packard 1100 HPLC coupled to a
Thermo TSQ triple quadrupole mass spectrometer as described
(Popendorf et al 2011).
3
Environ. Res. Lett. 6 (2011) 035301 B R Edwards et al
2.7. Cell counts
One milliliter seawater samples were collected in polypropylene
cryovials and preserved with 3.7% filtered formaldehyde.
After standing for 15 min at room temperature, the samples
were snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen and transported back to
the laboratory in a cryogenic dry shipper. The samples were
defrosted, stained with SYBR Green (Molecular Probes) in
triplicate, and cells were counted using a Guava 5HT (Millipore)
flow cytometer as described (Tripp 2008). Bacterial
cells and Synechococcus cells were differentiated and counted
using plots of side scatter versus yellow fluorescence and
red fluorescence. Samples for cell counts were taken at five
stations outside the slick, three stations within the slick, and
from two amendment experiments (section 2.8; table 1).
2.8. Amendment experiments
At stations I-1, I-4, and I-5, parallel sets of triplicate respiration
incubations (section 2.3) were amended with inorganic nutrients.
Inorganic nutrient amendments were made from concentrated
stocks of ammonium nitrate (NH4NO3) and dipotassium
phosphate (K2HPO4) dissolved in high purity water (HPLC
grade, Sigma); final concentrations in the incubations were
32 μmol l−1 NH4NO3 and 2 μmol l−1 K2HPO4.
2.9. Analysis of slick area from satellite data
The area of the Gulf of Mexico covered by the Deepwater
Horizon surface slick was estimated from publicly available
satellite derived surface oil analysis products. Daily Experimental
Marine Pollution Surveillance Reports (EMPSRs)
produced by the National Environmental Satellite, Data, and
Information service of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration were downloaded as JPEG images for the dates
19 June to 28 June (www.ssd.noaa.gov/PS/MPS/deepwater.
html). The EMPSRs had red pixels delineating the extent of the
oil slick on each day. A mask covering the spatial extent of the
red pixels was calculated in MATLAB (Mathworks). The area
of the mask was computed using the ‘bwarea’ command from
the image processing toolbox in MATLAB. We then scaled
the number of red pixels in each image to the number of total
pixels in a 1◦ latitude by 1◦ longitude square (approximately
10 800 km2 at 29◦N) within each image, and thereby calculated
the area of the slick.
2.10. Statistical analyses
Non-parametric statistical tests were conducted using Statistica
software (version 6.1; StatSoft). The Mann–Whitney test was
chosen for comparisons because the number of data points in
compared cases was generally small (n  5). Differences were
deemed significant when p-levels returned by Statistica were
<0.05.
3. Results and discussion
3.1. Phosphorus stress
Phosphate was scarce at all of the stations where phosphate
was measured, and there was no difference in concentrations
Figure 1. Alkaline phosphatase activity at sampling stations within
the slick and outside of the slick. Error bars indicate the magnitude
of the range of analytical triplicates. Data from inside the slick and
outside the slick are statistically distinct (Mann–Whitney, p < 0.05).
between stations inside and outside of the slick (Mann–
Whitney, p  0.05, nin = 3, nout = 4; table 1). Concentrations
were on the order of 10 nmol l−1 and were similar to those
observed in the northern Sargasso Sea (Cavender-Bares et al
2001, Ammerman et al 2003), an ecosystem where the growth
of bacteria has been shown to be phosphate limited (Cotner
et al 1997). However, alkaline phosphatase activity was
significantly higher within the slick (Mann–Whitney, p <
0.05, nin = 3, nout = 3; figure 1). Alkaline phosphatases
are enzymes used by marine microbes in an attempt to
access dissolved organic phosphorus when phosphate is scarce.
Elevated rates of alkaline phosphatase activity are generally
interpreted as an indication of enhanced phosphorus stress of
marine microbes (Perry 1972, Ammerman et al 2003, Sylvan
et al 2007, Dyhrman et al 2007 and references therein). Thus
our observations show that microbes within the slick were
more stressed than microbes outside of the slick; this was
presumably due to enhanced phosphorus demand being driven
by the availability of organic carbon from oil within the slick.
3.2. Microbial respiration and enzymatic activity
We observed that microbial respiration rates and enzyme
activities varied considerably over relatively short spatial
scales (<1 km) near the Deepwater Horizon site. Community
respiration rates were significantly higher within the oil slick
compared to outside the slick (Mann–Whitney, p < 0.05,
nin = 4, nout = 3; figure 2), indicating enhanced oxidation
of organic carbon. A study conducted in June 1993 found
that the mean respiration rate observed in this region of the
Gulf of Mexico ranged from 2.4 to 4.3 μmol O2 l
−1 d−1
(Pomeroy et al 1995), which is very similar to the mean
rate of 2.2 μmol O2 l
−1 d−1 (range 0.8–4.4 μmol O2 l
−1)
that we found at stations outside of the slick. Thus we
can reasonably assert that the stations outside of the slick
reflected pristine conditions (i.e. similar to conditions before
the spill). However, respiration rates inside the slick averaged
12.1 μmol O2 l
−1 d−1, (range 4.8–16.3 μmol O2 l
−1), which
4
Environ. Res. Lett. 6 (2011) 035301 B R Edwards et al
Figure 2. Community respiration rates at sampling stations within
the slick and outside of the slick after incubations of approximately
36 h; except for ‘I-1∗’, which was incubated for six days in parallel
with the hydrocarbon degradation experiment. Parallel sets of
incubations at stations within the slick were amended with inorganic
nutrients. Error bars indicate the magnitude of the range of
respiration rates for triplicate incubations. Data from inside the slick
and outside the slick are statistically distinct (Mann–Whitney,
p < 0.05).
is approximately five times greater than the respiration rates
outside of the slick. Thus the presence of oil stimulated an
enhanced respiration rate of 9.9 μmol O2 l
−1 d−1 (figure 2).
It should be noted that we do not believe that this enhanced
respiration is an artifact of the slightly elevated temperature
within the slick (table 1). Published temperature dependence
relationships for bacterial respiration (Q10 of approximately
2.3 (Lomas et al 2002)) would predict a rate increase of
only 11% in response to the 1.2 ◦C average temperature
elevation; the difference in average rates we observed was
455%. The respiration data support the conclusion that oil
from the Macondo well served as an organic carbon substrate
for respiration by microbes in surface water, and that these
microbes responded despite intense phosphorus stress.
The enhanced respiration rates inside the slick suggest that
the microbes rapidly acclimated to breaking down hydrocarbon
substrates. This is consistent with other studies showing
that deep-sea microbes within the subsurface plume were
also able to readily respond to the addition of hydrocarbons
to their environment (Hazen et al 2010, Valentine et al
2010, Kessler et al 2011). Indeed, we observed a decrease
in the n-C18/phytane ratio in our degradation experiments
from 2.2 to 1.5, which is a hallmark of natural microbial
degradation (e.g. De Jonge et al 1997). We also found that
approximately 0.4 mg l−1 of the observed 1.9 mg l−1 total
petroleum hydrocarbons were degraded over the course of
six days. The absolute degradation rate of 0.07 mg l−1 d−1
yields a steady-state hydrocarbon turnover rate of 0.04 d−1
(0.07 mg l−1 d−1 divided by 1.9 mg l−1). This turnover rate is
slower than reported in the deep-sea plume (Hazen et al 2010)
but nonetheless shows a half-life of hydrocarbons of only 26
days with respect to microbial degradation. Clearly, additional
factors (e.g. evaporation, photo-oxidation, physical dispersion)
contributed to shortening the overall half-life of the slicks.
Converting the hydrocarbon degradation rate to units of oxygen
equates to 7.1 μmol O2 l
−1 d−1, which corresponds to 71%
of the enhanced respiration rate. Given that our hydrocarbon
concentrations are minimum estimates of the concentration
of total oil in the water and in contact with microbes, it
is remarkable that the reported hydrocarbon degradation rate
accounted for such a large fraction of the enhanced respiration.
Although our data are limited to the specific time and
location of our study, extrapolating the excess rates of
respiration within the slick has the potential to yield muchneeded
constraints on the total potential rates at which
microbes degraded oil released to surface waters from the
Deepwater Horizon spill. Our estimates of the size of the slick
on the days during our cruise ranged from 5600 to 24 000 km2.
Given an excess respiration rate of 9.9 μmol O2 l
−1 d−1 and
a mixed layer depth of 15 m, we calculate that the total
microbial hydrocarbon degradation capacity across the surface
slick ranged from approximately 6×108 to 3×109 mol C d−1.
This calculation assumes that the hydrocarbon degradation
rate remained constant with time, which was probably not
the case as microbes are known to preferentially degrade
more labile hydrocarbons first, leaving more recalcitrant polar
molecules behind. However, the rate of oxygen drawdown
(i.e. respiration) remained linear over the course of the six-day
hydrocarbon degradation experiment (ordinary least squares
linear regression, R2 = 0.99, n = 35; not shown). Given
a mean flow rate from the Macondo well of 62 000 barrels
d−1 (McNutt et al 2011) and a carbon content of 1.1 ×
105 g C barrel−1 (Reddy et al 2011), the total flux of carbon
from the well was also on the order of 6 × 108 mol C d−1,
although some oil components dissolved at depth before
reaching the surface (Camilli et al 2010, Reddy et al 2011).
Nonetheless, our calculations suggest that the microbes in the
surface waters of the Gulf of Mexico possessed the metabolic
potential to degrade oil at a rate that was of the same order as
the delivery rate of oil. Of course other competing processes
(e.g. evaporation, photo-oxidation, physical dispersion) would
also have contributed to the removal of oil from the surface
slicks, and thus it is unlikely that this potential was completely
realized.
Lipase activity was also enhanced inside the slick (Mann–
Whitney, p < 0.05, nin = 3, nout = 3; figure 3)
suggesting that the population of microbes within the slick
had enzymatically acclimated to hydrolyze ester bonds within
lipids. There are few ester linkages in crude oil, and therefore
high lipase activity does not necessarily indicate a response to
or degradation of crude oil. It is conceivable that the lipase
activity could have been a response to the ester linkages in
dispersant molecules. Dioctyl sodium sulfosuccinate (DOSS)
contains multiple ester bonds and is a chemical component of
the dispersants used in response to the Deepwater Horizon oil
spill. It has been shown that dispersants can be utilized as a
sole carbon source by marine bacterial communities (MulkinsPhillips
and Stewart 1974). Additionally, a predecessor to
modern dispersants, Corexit 8666, was shown to support
enhanced growth of marine bacteria compared to un-amended
controls (Mulkins-Phillips and Stewart 1974). Therefore, it is
possible that the enhanced respiration that was not accounted
5
Environ. Res. Lett. 6 (2011) 035301 B R Edwards et al
Figure 3. Lipase activity at sampling stations within the slick and
outside of the slick. Error bars indicate the magnitude of the range of
analytical triplicates. Data from inside the slick and outside the slick
are statistically distinct (Mann–Whitney, p < 0.05).
for by hydrocarbon degradation could have been partially
supported by oxidation of dispersants.
Kujawinski et al (2011) detected DOSS in surface waters
at a station near the Deepwater Horizon site, but the goal of
their study was not to rigorously map DOSS concentrations
within the surface slick. So although data compiled by
Kujawinski et al (2011) indicate that dispersants were present
in surface waters in June 2010, it is not absolutely certain
that the slicks we sampled had been recently treated with
dispersants. Nonetheless, if a total of 5.3 × 106 l (Kujawinski
et al 2011) of dispersant was applied to the sea surface over
the course of the spill (84 days), then we can estimate the
approximate carbon flux from dispersants. For Corexit 9500A,
Kujawinski et al (2011) reported a density of 1.0 kg l−1
and a DOSS content of 10% (DOSS is 54% carbon; g C
(g DOSS)−1). The exact formulations of the dispersants are
proprietary information, and the carbon contents are unknown.
However, if we assume that the remaining 90% was composed
of equal parts light petroleum distillates (approximately 80%
carbon) and sorbitan (40% carbon) then the carbon content
of the bulk dispersant liquid was approximately 60% or
0.6 kg C l−1. This brings the delivery of carbon from
dispersants to approximately 3×106 mol C d−1, which is small
compared to the flux of oil. Nonetheless, it is possible that the
high lipase activities we observed were local responses to the
introduction of dispersants to surface waters.
3.3. Microbial biomass and abundance
Despite enhanced respiration, lipase activity and relatively
rapid oil degradation within the slick, we did not observe
greater concentrations of microbial polar membrane lipids
within the oil slick (Mann Whitney, p  0.05, nin = 5,
nout = 3; figure 4). In the surface ocean, PG and PE are
the major constituents of heterotrophic bacterial membranes
and SQDG is the dominant polar membrane lipid found in
the photosynthetic membranes of cyanobacteria and other
phytoplankton (Oliver and Colwell 1973, Van Mooy et al 2006,
Figure 4. Polar membrane lipid concentrations.
Phosphatidylglycerol and phosphatidylethanolamine (PG + PE) are
thought to be derived primarily from heterotrophic bacteria, while
sulfoquinovosyldiacylglycerol (SQDG) is thought to be derived from
the membranes of cyanobacteria and eukaryotic phytoplankton.
Results are from one analysis of surface waters at each station.
Figure 5. Heterotrophic bacteria and Synechococcus cell abundances
at stations O-3 through O-7 outside of the slick and at stations I-1
through I-3 inside of the slick. Error bars are the magnitude of the
range of analytical triplicates.
2009, Van Mooy and Fredricks 2010). While sulfolipids were
only recently identified in the surface ocean, phospholipids
have long been applied as a proxy for microbial biomass
(e.g. White et al 1979). Our data suggest that both bacterial and
phytoplankton biomass were relatively constant throughout our
study area regardless of the presence of oil slicks (figure 4).
In contrast to polar membrane lipids, cell abundances
of heterotrophic bacteria and the cyanobacteria of the genus
Synechococcus were about a factor of two lower inside the
slick than outside the slick (Mann–Whitney, p < 0.05,
nin = 3, nout = 5; figure 5). But we suggest that this
reflects a bias introduced during sampling. The difference
in microbial abundances could be explained by a mechanism
where cells became adsorbed to oil flocs (Hazen et al
2010), and these oil flocs adsorbed to the sides of the
polypropylene vials used to store the flow cytometry samples,
effectively excluding oil-adsorbed cells from counting. The
tight correlation between the abundances of heterotrophic
6
Environ. Res. Lett. 6 (2011) 035301 B R Edwards et al
bacterial cells and Synechococcus cells (Spearman Rank, R2 =
0.6173, p < 0.05, n = 16; not shown) suggests that
the adsorption of cells was a largely indiscriminate process.
The polar membrane lipid analyses were conducted from
samples filtered at sea and would have included both freeliving
microbes and microbes adsorbed to oil flocs. If biomass
estimates from polar membrane lipids provide a more faithful
indication of microbial abundance than flow cytometry, then
our observations of consistent microbial standing stocks inside
and outside of the slicks agree with studies of the 1979 IXTOC I
oil spill in the Bay of Campeche (Atlas et al 1980) and the
2002 Prestige oil spill off the coast of Portugal (Bode et al
2006), where there were no differences in pre- and post-spill
bacterial abundances. An alternative explanation is that since
polar membrane lipids were similar inside and outside the
slick, the abundance data are indicating that there was more
biomass per cell inside the slick than outside the slick (i.e. the
cells inside the slick were larger). However, the differences
in median side scatter and green fluorescence of microbial
cells inside and outside of the slick were <10% (data not
shown), indicating that there were no major differences in
the distribution of cell size or DNA content of the microbial
community. The DNA content of microbial cells as revealed
by flow cytometry has shown to be correlated with microbial
growth rate (Longnecker et al 2006). Thus our available
evidence indicates that while microbial respiration and enzyme
activity were enhanced within the slick, microbial growth
appeared to be arrested within the slick.
3.4. Controls on microbial activity, abundance and biomass
within surface slicks
The lack of increased microbial numbers or biomass within
the slick indicates that the enhanced respiration, alkaline
phosphatase activity, and lipase activity in the slick were in
effect ‘futile’ attempts by microbes to grow in response to the
injection of organic matter into their environment. We propose
two possible mechanisms for this futile microbial activity
within the slicks: (1) growth rates were limited by nutrients
other than organic carbon, or (2) respiration fueled an increase
in microbial growth but top-down processes suppressed the
accumulation of microbial stocks. It should be noted that a
review by Gasol et al (2002) concluded that top-down control
of bacterial communities was more prevalent than nutrient
limitation in oligotrophic settings. However, the oil introduced
by the Deepwater Horizon spill resulted in an unprecedentedly
perturbed system—phosphate depleted but with an abundance
of organic carbon—where conditions differed markedly from
typical offshore oligotrophic settings.
3.4.1. Nutrient limitation of microbial growth within slicks.
As mentioned previously, bacterial growth and respiration in
the central Gulf of Mexico were observed to be primarily
limited by phosphate availability (Pomeroy et al 1995).
Therefore, we focused on studying the impact of inorganic
nutrient amendments on the microbial degradation of oil within
the slicks. We observed a distinct increase in respiration
rates in nutrient amendment experiments at two of the three
Figure 6. Heterotrophic bacterial cell abundance and Synechococcus
cell abundance, for inorganic amendment experiments conducted at
stations I-1 and I-4. Bacterial polar membrane lipid concentrations
inorganic amendment experiments were determined at station I-4
only. The ‘t = 0’ results are from the seawater used to set up the
incubations immediately prior to dispensing into replicate incubation
bottles. The ‘control’ and ‘nutrients’ results are from incubations
conducted for 36 h of incubation. The ‘(6-day)’ results are from
incubations conducted in parallel with the hydrocarbon degradation
experiment. Error bars are the magnitude of the range of triplicate
incubations.
amendment stations within the surface slick (station I-1 and
I-4; Mann–Whitney, p < 0.05; figure 2). At station I-1,
we observed that respiration rates approximately tripled in
response to inorganic nutrients (Mann–Whitney, p < 0.05).
At station I-4, the rate of respiration increased by 42% in
the inorganic nutrient treatments compared to the control
(Mann–Whitney, p < 0.05). The increase in respiration
in response to nutrient amendments is consistent with Atlas’
(1981) conclusion from the review of sixteen different studies
that the addition of N and P to oil contaminated seawater
yielded faster degradation rates of hydrocarbons.
The abundance of heterotrophic bacteria more than
doubled in response to nutrients at station I-1, while at station
I-4 there was no significant increase (figure 6). However, polar
membrane lipids were quantified at station I-4, and nutrient
amendments resulted in a 93% increase in the concentration
of PG + PE compared to the control (Mann–Whitney, p <
0.05; figure 6). Overall, these results suggest that growth
of heterotrophic bacteria, either in terms of abundance or
biomass, was limited by the availability of nutrients. As
might be expected in incubations conducted in the absence of
sunlight, the concentration of Synechococcus did not increase
significantly in response to nutrient amendments, nor did the
concentration of SQDG (figure 6).
The additional physiological demands associated with
surviving under conditions of nutrient stress (e.g. expression
of alkaline phosphatase enzymes) are energetically expensive
and have the potential to drive down bacterial growth efficiency
and increase the cellular carbon demand (Teixeira-de-Mattos
and Neijssel 1997, Del Giorgio and Cole 1998). Such an
increase in maintenance energy could account for the enhanced
7
Environ. Res. Lett. 6 (2011) 035301 B R Edwards et al
respiration rates within the slick, which occurred in the absence
of increased microbial standing stocks.
3.4.2. Grazing control of microbial standing stocks within
slicks. Although past studies and our own amendment
incubations indicate that microbial growth was probably
limited by inorganic nutrients within the slick, we did
not have the opportunity to actually measure growth rates;
implementing the radiotracer methods used to make bacterial
production (BP) measurements was not possible within the
time and logistical constraints of rapidly mobilizing for our
research at sea. Our flow cytometry results provide some
evidence that growth rates were not enhanced in the slick. Yet
we cannot unequivocally exclude the possibility that enhanced
microbial growth was simply being checked by enhanced topdown
controls (i.e. mortality) within the slick, which prevented
the accumulation of microbial standing stocks.
Grazing and viral lysis are important top-down control
mechanisms in microbial ecosystems (Proctor and Fuhrman
1990, Gasol et al 2002), but grazing often outweighs viral
lysis as the dominant mechanism of microbial mortality in
oligotrophic systems (Guixa-Boixereu et al 1999). Indeed,
a study that traced the carbon isotopic signatures of the
planktonic food web in the Gulf of Mexico after the Deepwater
Horizon spill concluded that there was trophic transfer of
carbon from oil to bacteria to higher levels in the food web
(Graham et al 2010). In addition, previous research on the
response of the microbial community to the Prestige oil spill
off the coast of Spain suggests that grazing control resulted in
an increase in bacterial production and respiration within oil
contaminated waters without a subsequent increase in bacterial
biomass (Bode et al 2006). However, it must be noted that
these two studies were conducted in nearshore environments
that were unlikely to have been as nutrient depleted as waters
we studied in proximity to the Deepwater Horizon site.
4. Conclusions
Microbes within the surface slick showed higher rates of
alkaline phosphatase activity, indicating enhanced phosphate
stress. Despite this, rates of microbial respiration and lipase
activity were also higher within the slick, and the degradation
of hydrocarbons was fairly rapid and supported the majority of
respiration. However, we observed no increase in microbial
abundances or biomass within the slick. Amendments with
inorganic nutrients led to increased respiration and bacterial
biomass, which suggests that microbial growth was limited
by nutrients as we had hypothesized and had been observed
previously (Pomeroy et al 1995).
Our observations suggest that the microbial community
possessed the potential to respire hydrocarbons at an
unprecedented rate for the oligotrophic Gulf of Mexico; our
estimate suggests that this rate was potentially great enough
to keep pace with the flux of oil reaching the surface from
the Macondo well. Given our proximity to the Deepwater
Horizon site it is likely that the oil, and possibly dispersants,
had been introduced to the surface community only shortly
before we sampled the water and made our observations. Thus,
the observed differences in microbial respiration and activity
between stations within the slick and outside the slick is a
testament to the rapid response of the microbes in the surface
waters of the Gulf of Mexico to oil from the Deepwater
Horizon spill.
