Besides clones from various sulfidic habitats such as hydrothermal vents, springs and cave streams, a phylotype retrieved from a benzene-mineralizing consortium (Phelps et al., 1998) was also affiliated to this group. In the clone library from the sand particles, sequences affiliated to several genera of sulfate-reducing Deltaproteobacteria were detected. For most of these phylotypes, related cultivated species have been described (Fig. 3). The most abundant Deltaproteobacterium belongs to the genus Desulfovibrio, which comprises physiologically versatile sulfate reducers, known for their capability to consume hydrogen very efficiently (Cord-Ruwisch et al., 1988; Bak & Pfennig, 1991). Hence, Desulfovibrio spp. are typical hydrogenotrophs in syntrophic associations under sulfate-reducing conditions (e.g. Elshahed et al., 2001; Jackson & McInerney, 2002). Also, Desulfobulbus relatives are generally very versatile and can grow on a wide range of substrates including hydrogen (e.g. Laanbroek et al., 1982; Lien et al., 1998). Desulfovibrio and Desulfobulbus species are not known for acetate oxidation (incomplete oxidizers). Desulfobacca-like sequences were detected on both sand particles and lava granules. The only described species, Desulfobacca acetoxidans, is specialized on the metabolization of acetate, and can even outcompete acetoclastic methanogens (Oude Elferink et al., 1999). Furthermore, the occurrence of several sequences related to Desulfuromonas acetexigens in the sand consortium indicates a function in acetate degradation, because D. acetexigens uses exclusively acetate as the sole source of carbon and energy (Finster et al., 1994). Several phylotypes of the sand consortium were related to Desulfobacterium and Desulfobacula spp. Species of these genera are known to degrade aromatics completely; hence, they are also able to oxidize acetate. Desulfobacteraceae are involved in the degradation of other aromatic substrates used by the sand consortium ZzBs1-4, as reflected by higher relative T-RF abundances after growth on toluene, phenol and benzoate (Fig. 6). As explained below, we suggest that the mentioned phylotypes affiliated to sulfate-reducing Deltaproteobacteria are mainly responsible for hydrogen and acetate oxidation coupled to sulfate reduction in the course of anaerobic benzene degradation. Sequences affiliated to the genus Syntrophus were mainly detected in the lava-derived clone library. Syntrophus spp. have been shown to grow syntrophically on benzoate in coculture with hydrogenotrophic sulfate reducers or methanogens (Mountfort et al., 1984; Elshahed et al., 2001), but possibly they are also capable of syntrophic acetate oxidation as shown recently in microcosm experiments with 13C-labeled acetate (Chauhan & Ogram, 2006). Phylogenetic diversity of the lava- and sand-associated consortia compared with other benzene-degrading consortia Bacterial communities of sediment-free benzene-degrading enrichment cultures were examined by several authors. Phelps et al. (1998) and Musat & Widdel (2008) investigated cultures originally enriched from marine sediments under sulfate-reducing conditions. The consortium of Musat & Widdel (2008) consists only of Deltaproteobacteria, and the dominant phylotype is a Desulfobacterium species. The authors postulate that this organism is solely responsible for benzene mineralization in their culture. A clone closely related to this phylotype, named SB-21, had been described before by Phelps et al. (1998) in a sulfate-reducing, benzene-degrading consortium. 