Therefore, we suggest benzene is oxidized according to the following equations: image(3) image(4) The fermentation of benzene to acetate and hydrogen (reaction 3) is thermodynamically not feasible under standard conditions, but becomes exergonic in the case of low hydrogen and acetate concentrations, allowing growth of a putative benzene-fermenting organism. The energy demand of syntrophic bacteria can be very low: for Syntrophus species, inline image of −5 kJ mol−1 was observed as being sufficient for growth (Jackson & McInerney, 2002). Acetate and hydrogen are key intermediates during the anaerobic conversion of many organic substrates by the anaerobic food chain; both compounds are readily consumed by different types of anaerobes (Schink, 1997; Zengler et al., 1999). Alternatively, benzene might be oxidized to acetate by a single sulfate reducer according to the following equation: image(5) However, in such a scenario, the dominance of Desulfovibrio sp. in the sand consortium cannot be explained. It should also be mentioned that all currently known aromatic-degrading sulfate-reducing bacteria are complete oxidizers, probably due to the high energy value of acetate. Acetate might be oxidized by sulfate reducers related to Desulfobacca (sand, lava granules), Desulfuromonas (sand) and Desulfobacterium (sand), and possibly by other groups (Magnetobacterium- and Sulfurovum-like), according to the following equation: image(6) We assume that in our communities, the member of the Cryptanaerobacter/Pelotomaculum group ferments benzene to acetate according to equation (4), thus being responsible for the initial transformation reactions of the benzene degradation pathway. As shown for the sand-associated consortium ZzBs1-4 during growth on aromatic substrates other than benzene, the relative T-RF abundance of this phylotype decreased or fell below the detection limit (Fig. 6). By contrast, after prolonged cultivation on benzene (270 days) the relative T-RF abundance of Cryptanaerobacter/Pelotomaculum increased remarkably, indicating a further enrichment of this organism within the consortium (Fig. 6). Although limitations of T-RFLP analyses, e.g., differences in amplification efficiency or non-PCR-based biases, might impair the elucidation of real community structures, relative changes in community composition are reliably reflected by T-RFLP profiles (Hartmann & Widmer, 2008). A significant increase of the relative T-RF abundance of the Cryptanaerobacter/Pelotomaculum phylotype after cultivation on benzene was consistently detected with different restriction enzymes (Fig. 6) and with different amounts of template DNA in the range of 1–5 ng (data not shown). Moreover, in a toluene-grown culture of ZzBS1-4 that had been shifted back to benzene as the sole carbon source, neither benzene degradation nor sulfide production could be restored even after 90 days of incubation on benzene (data not shown), indicating outcompetition of the benzene-attacking key organism. Therefore, we conclude that this organism is responsible for the initiation of the anaerobic benzene degradation on both sand and lava granules. Whereas we provide strong indications at the functional role of the Cryptanaerobacter/Pelotomaculum phylotype and the Deltaproteobacteria in the benzene-degrading communities, the physiological role of the Magnetobacterium- and Sulfurovum-related phylotypes and their possible involvement in syntrophic interactions still remain to be elucidated. These phylotypes were the predominant members of the communities colonizing either sand or lava granules, respectively. Obviously different properties of sand particles and lava granules gave rise to different community compositions. However, theoretically, both groups of organisms might occupy the same ecological niche in the two habitats. According to the hypothesized degradation pathway and regarding the high relative T-RF abundance of the Sulfurovum-like phylotype, they might also act as hydrogen consumers or acetate oxidizers. Acknowledgements This work is integrated in the internal research and development program of the UFZ as well as the SAFIRA project. The authors thank Jörg Ahlheim, Ralf Trabitzsch and Werner Kletzander of the Department of Groundwater Remediation for help regarding sampling of sand and lava material from the columns. Special thanks are due to Stephanie Hinke and Ute Lohse for excellent technical assistance. 