Cluster analysis of Biolog GN substrate oxidation rates analyzed using Manhattan and squared Euclidean algorithms. Samples clustered geographically, with contamination levels having no apparent influence. SAB, similarity coefficient. Sample A1 demonstrated a reduced ability to oxidize the Biolog GN substrates with respect to both the total number and the rates at which oxidation occurred. A1 was also the most severely contaminated sample at 26 900 ppm TPH. The soils examined in this study represent two different northern Canadian communities, both subjected to relatively long-term petroleum hydrocarbon contamination. The total heterotrophic cold-adapted population, determined at 5°C, ranged from 106 to 108 CFU g soil−1 (Table 1). These values are comparable to results obtained from other petroleum hydrocarbon-contaminated sites in the far north, such as Baffin Island (105) [21] and Alaska (105–107) [35]. Previous studies have documented an increase in the hydrocarbon-degrading population after contamination [6,36,37]. Although changes in the total hydrocarbon-tolerant/degrading population were not measured in this study, a similar increase in the total heterotrophic population was observed at the contaminated Alert and Kuujjuaq sites. The bacterial molecular diversity in the soil samples was estimated by the number of amplified 16S rDNA bands following DGGE separation, as performed by Muyzer et al. [10]. Each band was assumed to represent a single operational taxonomic unit [38]. Several interesting differences between the Alert and Kuujjuaq sites were noted. Banding patterns within the Kuujjuaq sites could be grouped into two categories, K1–K2 (contaminated) and K3–K4 (uncontaminated). Kuujjuaq samples K1 and K2 displayed a moderate number of bands, whereas samples K3 and K4 produced a greater number of distinct bands, all of equal intensity. This difference in the number of bands suggests that the microbial community within the contaminated samples K1 and K2 underwent a decrease in species diversity as members of the bacterial population were subjected to selective enrichment. The apparent decrease in diversity of a microbial community following contamination by petroleum hydrocarbons has also been observed by others [39–42]. The greater number of bands observed in the K3 and K4 samples suggested a greater diversity in the bacterial species present. The relatively equal intensities of the bands within the K3 and K4 samples is interesting, although the importance of band intensity remains to be determined. The response of the Alert microbial communities to hydrocarbon contamination, as observed using DGGE, appeared to be different from that of the Kuujjuaq sites. Samples A2 (uncontaminated) and A3 (contaminated) produced very similar patterns with respect to the number of bands visualized, yet contamination levels were significantly different. A1, the most heavily contaminated sample, produced a similar number of bands as the uncontaminated site Ac, yet both of these produced significantly fewer bands than either A2 or A3. These results do not follow the observed decrease in species diversity following contamination, as in the Kuujjuaq samples or by other groups [39–42]. In the case of A3, it appears that molecular diversity is maintained or increased in comparison to the uncontaminated controls A2 and Ac, respectively. Similar observations of stable or increased microbial diversity after contamination have been noted by other researchers [37,43]. Alert, due to its latitude, has fewer plant species, which would limit the variety and complexity of plant-derived organic substrates for indigenous bacteria. Following contamination at Alert, the number and variety of potential carbon substrates increased, resulting in an increase in bacterial activity, which could ultimately increase bacterial diversity. Local environmental and physico-chemical conditions would also play a role in the selective enrichment of the bacterial population [37,39]. 