Solvent-extractable (CH2Cl2) B was detected (1.8−64 mg/kg) mainly from the medium and light oils. After 2 months of biotreatment, most soils contained little or no detectable B (<0.02 mg/kg). Initial TEX concentrations (35−1624 mg/kg) in the Norwood/Baccto soils were also reduced to low levels (<0.02 mg/kg) during the same period. Although residual TEX from the medium and light oils (2 and 56 mg/kg) were detected in the Norwood soil after 2 months, these hydrocarbons were below the detection level after 8−11 months. Data on batch and column leaching experiments on the oily soils are summarized in Table 3. Soluble O&G levels in aqueous (neutral pH) batch extractions were only 10−30 mg/L in the bioremediated soil after the first extraction (Table 3, Section A). Subsequent extractions reduced the O&G levels to <5−15 mg/L. No BTEX compounds (<5 μg/L) were detected in the first or subsequent O&G extracts. Soil column leaching tests (Table 3, Section B) also showed that the highest B leachate concentrations (900−10 000 μg/L) were from the soils containing medium and light crude oils and lowest in soils weathered with heavy crude. Biotreated soils had substantially reduced levels of BTEX after 10−30 column pore vol varying from <1 to 50 μg/L leachate from initial high levels of 10 000 μg/L. We also observed that no heavy metals such as V, Ni, or Cu were released (<0.4 mg/L leachate) from any oily soil during the column leaching experiment. These data indicate that bioremediated oily soils will contain very low levels of leachable aromatic hydrocarbons. Oily soils of similar composition that are undergoing land treatment remediation would present a very low risk from BTEX infiltration to the subsoil and groundwater environment since it is well known also that BTEX concentrations of 10−5000 μg/L are rapidly biodegraded by naturally-occurring soil microbes (57). There have been reports demonstrating the low leachability of oily waste components from soil. Huddleston and Myers (3) showed that heavy metals and water-soluble organics leaching was <0.01 to <1% of the total metal and organic content of refinery oily waste during rainfall simulation experiments. Bioremediation studies by Huesemann and Moore (7) on a weathered Michigan crude oily soil also showed that no BTEX (<1 μg/L leachate) was detected in batch extractions (pH 7) of the soil. Laboratory lysimeter experiments by Dibble and Bartha (58) on land treatment of refinery oily sludges (5% w/w) in an acidic (pH 3.7) sandy loam showed that little or no ether-extractable (O&G determination) material was detected in column leachates of bioremediated waste. More recently, Gould and Pardus (44) presented a simple one-dimensional model to describe the potential for migration of organic compounds to groundwater by estimating leaching potential using soil/waste characteristics, contaminant concentrations, rainfall rates, soil hydraulic conductivity, groundwater gradients, and distance to receptor wells. These types of models would be helpful in assessing the mobility of residual hydrocarbons (e.g., BTEX) in treated and untreated oily soils. Earthworm Survival and Microtox Assays. In estimating the environmental toxicology and efficacy of the bioremediation process on oily soils, we chose tests utilizing representative soil-dwelling species such as earthworms and plants. In the earthworm bioassay, survival of adult Eisenia was determined after a 2-week exposure to soil. These results shown in Table 4, Section A, indicate that all oily soils were acutely toxic to Eisenia in the first 2−4 weeks of the bioremediation experiment. The Norwood soils with heavy, medium, and light oils were toxic to earthworms for at least 8 months. In contrast, all animals survived in the three Norwood/Baccto oily soils after only 3−5 months treatment. We previously showed (Figure 1) that the maximum reduction in oil hydrocarbons (TPH) was usually after 3−5 months for both soil types. In general, loss in earthworm toxicity appeared to correlate with optimum hydrocarbon biodegradation with the exception of the low organic Norwood soil. It is not known why toxicity persisted in the Norwood soils; however, it is possible that residual or uncharacterized petroleum compounds (undegraded or incompletely metabolized) contributed to the acute effects on Eisenia survival. In contrast, hydrocarbons may have degraded more rapidly or were sequestered (not bioavailable) in the higher organic Norwood/Baccto soil. 