Results of the solid phase Microtox assay utilizing sensitivity to the luminescent microbe, Photobacterium, to dilutions of oily soils are shown in Table 4, Section B. The Microtox test appears to be less sensitive and more variable than the earthworm bioassay. Also, bioremediated soils lose most of their Microtox inhibiting activity after 3 months. Seed Germination and Plant Growth. Data on the effects of heavy, medium, and light oily soils on the 21-day seed germination and plant growth bioassays before and after bioremediation are summarized in Tables 5 and 6. In the untreated soils, seed germination for corn, wheat, and oat species was inhibited (50−100%) by the presence of 25 000−26 000 and 4200−9600 mg/kg TPH, respectively, of medium and light crude oils. In contrast, seed germination in the bioremediated soils was not significantly different from control soils that contained no crude oil (Table 5). It is interesting to note that the residual TPH in which germination was not affected in both bioremediated soils varied from 7000 to 10 000, from 8200 to 8600, and from 1000 to 1200 mg/kg for the heavy, medium, and light oily soils, respectively. Results of the effects of oily soils on plant growth (Table 6) show that, in the untreated material, heavy and medium crude oils significantly enhanced growth (mg/plant dry wt) of the corn plant by 40−70% over control plants grown in oil-free soil. The growth stimulating effect was still apparent in the bioremediated soils. This enhanced effect of crude oil hydrocarbons on plant growth has been reported in the literature. Over 75 years ago, Carr (59) observed that soybean yields increased at least 50% in field plots of a sandy peat soil with 7500 mg/kg oil from an accidental pipeline release. Concentrations of crude oil in soil ≥25 000 mg/kg, however, affected nodule formation and growth. Also, Baker (60) cited (a) studies on increased yields of saltmarsh grass exposed to soils containing a heavy crude fraction (high boiling cut) of Kuwati oil and (b) experiments by Russian workers on increased crop yields associated with a heavy polar oil fraction containing naphthenic acids. In our studies, growth yields of germinated wheat and oat seeds were significantly reduced (20−70% less) in both untreated soils containing medium and light oils. After 8−11 months bioremediation, wheat and oat growth yields were significantly improved and similar to control plants grown in oil-free soil. However, some plant growth inhibition was still apparent in both soil types with the heavy, medium, and light oils. This reduction in growth between plant species (corn, wheat, and oat) varied from 0 to 40% from the control (no oil) soils. These results indicate that undegraded petroleum compounds (other than BTEX) or metabolites may be affecting plant growth. The phytotoxicity of petroleum hydrocarbons has not been studied sufficiently in recent years. Work by Baker (60) and Currier and Peoples (61) several years ago indicated that high concentrations of light hydrocarbons (octane, decane), aromatics (BTEX), and naphtha(cyclohexanes) and phenolic-like compounds reduced respiration, transpiration, and photosynthesis in grasses (barley, mustard) and crop plants (carrot, citrus). More current experiments by Wang and Bartha (62) showed that soybean and rye germination and dry wt yield in soil lysimeters contaminated with a jet fuel, heating oil, or diesel fuel (55 000−75 000 mg/kg) were significantly improved after 2−5 months biotreatment. In field plot studies of land treating heavy crude oils, Raymond et al. (26) observed that although 30−50% of the initial O&G levels (25 000−35 000 mg/kg) were degraded in 6 months, germination and growth of radish, beans, and turnip plants were restricted, indicating that residual hydrocarbons or metabolites were phytotoxic. Huddleston and Myers (3) applied a mixed oily waste (15% w/w) to field plots and showed that soils which contained 17 000−22 000 mg/kg residual hydrocarbons had no adverse effects on wheat and bermuda grass germination and growth. These latter studies suggest that hydrocarbon phytotoxicity cannot be predicted and varies widely with oil and soil type, concentration and plant species tested. 