3B and 5B) and, at much lower intensities, in oil-treated plots treated with liquid fertilizer and plots treated with oil only (Fig. 3A and data not shown). The clones (n = 40) were screened by ARDRA, which revealed that five restriction patterns occurred more than once. DGGE analysis of representatives of these five ARDRA types showed that two of these representatives comigrated with bands a and b in Fig. 5B. These ARDRA types represented 12.5 and 37.5% of the clones in the library, respectively. Sequencing of the cloned, nearly complete 16S rRNA genes indicated that the ARDRA type that comigrated with band a was very similar to Pseudomonas stutzeri 16S rRNA (99.7%), while the ARDRA type that comigrated with band b was almost identical to Alcanivorax borkumensis 16S rRNA (99.9%) (Fig. 7). Sequencing of bands a and b excised from a DGGE gel yielded high-quality sequences containing 160 nucleotides, which were identical to the corresponding sequences of the full-length 16S rRNA gene clones with similar DGGE migration characteristics. This provided stronger evidence that there was selection for bacteria related to P. stutzeri and A. borkumensis in the plots that showed the most effective hydrocarbon degradation. In the day 11 DGGE profile for the plot in block 2 treated with slow-release fertilizer a third band (band c in Fig. 3B and 5B) stood out as it was not observed in DGGE profiles for the other treatments and was still detectable 101 days after treatment with the slow-release fertilizer. DGGE screening of clones from the 16S rRNA gene clone library did not reveal a match with this band. Therefore, band c was excised from the DGGE gel and sequenced. The sequence recovered exhibited 96% identity with the 16S rRNA from the gamma-proteobacterium Idiomarina loihiensis (accession no. AF288370). After 80 days, a dominant band was observed in most of the DGGE profiles from the plots treated with slow-release fertilizer (band d in Fig. 3B and 5B); this band was detectable until the end of the experiment. The sequence of this 16S rRNA gene fragment exhibited 90.2% identity with the sequences of the gamma-proteobacteria Microbulber hydrolyticus (accession no. U58338) and Serratia plymythica (AJ233433). DISCUSSION In this study, by using a randomized block design, we demonstrated that buried oil was degraded significantly in the field during the first 3 months of the experiment when plots were fertilized with nutrients. When fertilizer treatment was stopped, the extent of oil degradation (percent removed) in unfertilized plots equaled the extent of degradation in the fertilizer-treated plots. However, the time that it took to achieve the same level of hydrocarbon degradation was longer in plots that did not receive fertilizer treatment. The type of treatment did not influence the oil components that were degraded. Although during the first 2 weeks significant differences were observed between blocks (as determined from carbon dioxide production), differences were not evident from oil chemistry measurements after 3 months. Interestingly however, the absolute amount of oil was smaller with both fertilizer treatments (25). The results of this study of bioremediation of buried oil are consistent with the results of two previous experiments in which a randomized block design was used, which showed that bioremediation treatment significantly enhanced oil degradation on surface-contaminated shorelines (29, 33). To the best of our knowledge, our study uniquely integrated a robust randomized block design with a comprehensive statistical analysis of bacterial community dynamics. In addition, higher-resolution molecular analysis demonstrated the importance of and rapid proliferation of the oil-degrading organism Alcanivorax in oil spill bioremediation under field conditions, suggesting that Alcanivorax spp. 