2B and C), in agreement with the absence of significant biodegradation of TPH, TRH, and alkanes (Fig. 2D). Effect of nutrient amendment on bacterial community structure and dynamics.Effect of bioremediation treatments on bacterial community structure was determined by using 16S rDNA-based PCR-DGGE for a number of treatments and sampling times (Table 1). In order to determine relationships between the community fingerprints, similarities were calculated on the basis of the absence or presence of bands (Dice coefficient) and on the basis of whole-track curve densitometric information (Pearson product-moment coefficient). Results based on the two coefficients were comparable; therefore, only the band-based similarities will be described. Analysis of triplicate samples taken from a single microcosm at a single sampling time showed that microbial communities were highly similar (95% ± 5%), indicating low spatial heterogeneity within the microcosms. However, obvious differences in community structure were evident both in time (Fig. 3 and 4) and between different treatments (Fig. 5 and 6). No obvious changes in the composition of the predominant bacterial communities occurred over time in the microcosm treated with fertilizer but no oil (FO). Although DGGE analysis of replicate microcosms for the FO treatment was not conducted in this study, data from a related field experiment that incorporates a fully replicated randomized block design indicate that DGGE profiles from the same beach sediments used in this study and treated with fertilizer only are highly similar over time and between replicate blocks (data not shown). The largest changes occurred in the microcosms remediated with 1 and 4% N (Fig. 4); the average similarity relative to day 0 was significantly lower for these two microcosms than in the other three oiled, nutrient-amended microcosms (P < 0.05). The most dramatic changes in community structure occurred during the first 6 days following oil addition, and profiles between days 6 and 26 were significantly more similar to each other than to profiles obtained from day 0 samples (Fig. 4; P < 0.05), suggesting that, following an initial significant change in community composition, the bacterial community structure remained relatively stable. Nevertheless, for all oiled microcosms, community changes after 6 days were significantly larger than in the microcosm that was not treated with oil (FO) over the same time period (P < 0.05). The different nutrient treatments led to the development of clearly different microbial communities (Fig. 5). As expected, communities were highly similar at the start of the experiment (Fig. 6). The largest differences between treatments, as indicated by the lowest average similarities, were observed after 6 days (Fig. 6). The average similarity between the different treatments was low (0.58 to 0.71) and not significantly different from the similarity of each individual treatment relative to either the unfertilized, oiled control (0% N) or the unpolluted control (FO) (P > 0.05). This indicated that a unique microbial community was selected in each microcosm. However, three independent microcosms were prepared for one of the bioremediation treatments (0.75% N). The average similarity between the DGGE profiles of these three independently operated microcosms, which were subjected to the same nutrient treatment, was slightly higher than the average similarity between those of microcosms treated with different levels of inorganic nutrients (Fig. 6). However, statistical analysis showed that differences in community structure between the true replicate microcosms receiving the same nutrient treatment were not significantly different from the differences measured between the communities in microcosms receiving different nutrient treatments (P > 0.05). Phylogenetic analysis and diversity of bacterial communities.To obtain a more specific picture of which bacterial taxa were stimulated by the oil and bioremediation treatments, phylogenetic analysis of cloned 16S rRNA genes was performed. 