Field site.Sediment for microcosms was obtained from the upper part of the intertidal zone of Stert Flats, Somerset, United Kingdom (51°12.3′ N, 3°3.9′ W). The upper 10 to 15 cm of this beach is mixed by tidal action and waves, and sediment was collected from this depth interval. Sediment was transported to the laboratory in a cool box at ambient temperature (<10°C) and used for microcosm experiments within 1 day of collection. The sediment was a fine sand (80% of the particles were in the range of 125 to 180 μm) containing 3.2% mud (sediment particles of <63 μm), with a density of 1.6 g/cm3 (wet weight) and a moisture content of 34% (vol/vol) at the time of collection at low tide. The average total organic matter content of 10 sediment samples was 0.6% ± 0.12%. The slope of the beach was 4% at the sampling point. On the basis of this slope and tide information, a tidal regimen for the laboratory microcosms was set at a mean vertical flow rate of seawater of 1.6 m/h and a submergence of the sediment for 1 h in every 12 h. Microcosm experiments.Sediment was homogenized with synthetic seawater (Instant Ocean; Aquarium Systems Inc.) in the laboratory, and 2.0 kg of wet sediment was placed into a microcosm (Fig. 1) and held at 20 ± 3°C. Fresh synthetic seawater provided each beach microcosm with two tidal cycles each day (12 h apart, 1 liter of seawater per cycle), with the ebb tide waters drained from each microcosm into 20-liter acid-washed plastic bottles. To allow equilibration of physical and chemical parameters, the microcosms were subjected to six tidal cycles before the addition of oil. Oil spilled at sea and washed onto a beach was simulated by weathering forties crude oil by distillation at 250°C in order to remove low-molecular-weight volatile hydrocarbons (e.g., <nC11 and BTEX [benzene, toluene, ethylbenzene, xylene]). Total resolvable hydrocarbons (TRH), nC11-to-nC35 alkanes, and aromatic hydrocarbons contributed, respectively, 31.2% ± 3.8%, 12.7% ± 0.6%, and 1.9% ± 0.2% of the total petroleum hydrocarbons (TPH) in the weathered oil. The weathered oil was mixed vigorously with synthetic seawater (25%, vol/vol), to form a stable water-in-oil emulsion. The emulsion was added to the microcosms at high tide at a level of 3.7 kg/m2 by pouring it onto the seawater. Inorganic nutrient solutions were added 24 h after oil addition and also after 7, 14, and 21 days. Each nutrient addition (50 ml in tap water) was calculated to provide a defined percentage of N (as sodium nitrate) and P (as potassium dihydrogen phosphate) relative to the total oil mass on a weight basis. The different treatments applied to the microcosms are shown in Table 1. Since the microcosms were labor intensive and resource demanding, only a few treatments were replicated (Table 1). Beach sediment treated with fertilizer alone was used as a control rather than untreated sediments because previous experiments had shown that nutrient-amended beach sediments produced DGGE profiles identical to those of untreated beach sediments and that the profiles obtained were stable over a 108-day sampling period (42). Sampling from microcosms.For all oiled microcosms, it was noted that the simulated tidal cycles mixed the oil into the upper 3 to 4 cm of the sediment. Only the oiled portion of the sediment was sampled. Triplicate samples (ca. 10 g) were taken for molecular analysis on the day that the microcosms were set up (referred to as day 0) and 2, 6, 13, 20, and 26 days after initial nutrient addition. Samples were collected by scraping the upper 2 to 4 mm of the sediment with a flame-sterilized spatula. At the start and end of the experiment, triplicate samples of each microcosm were removed for oil chemistry analysis. Samples were stored at −20°C until analysis. Samples (30 ml) of the tidal seawater leaving the microcosms were taken from the acid-washed plastic bottles for nutrient analysis and stored at −20°C. Carbon dioxide measurements.The evolution rate of carbon dioxide from each microcosm was determined before oil was added and daily thereafter at the same point in the tidal cycle. The headspace of a sealed microcosm was circulated through the cell of an infrared gas analyzer (Servomex) by a method detailed by Swannell et al. 