(39). The device was calibrated by using a CO2-free-air standard and a compressed-air cylinder containing 335 ppm (by volume) CO2. The stability of the analyzer over the duration of the measurements (<5 min) was determined by circulating the headspace of an empty glass bottle through the sample cell. The drift was always less than 4 ppm. Nutrient analysis.As an indirect measure of nutrient concentrations in pore water in the microcosms, inorganic nitrogen concentrations in the seawater collected after the simulated tidal cycles were determined by using a Technicon autoanalyzer system (28). Oil chemistry.Hydrocarbons in oiled sediments (10 g) spiked with squalane and 1,1-binaphthyl standards to determine extraction efficiency were extracted, analyzed by gas chromatography with flame ionization detection and mass spectrometric detection, and quantified as described previously (39). The efficiency of recovery of the added standards was, on average, 83%. Replicate analyses showed that the variability of measured values was always less than 10%. To distinguish between physical removal and biodegradation, TPH, total GC resolvable hydrocarbons, nC11 to nC35 alkanes, and polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAH) were expressed relative to 17α(72),25β(72)-hopane, a degradation-resistant compound present in crude oil (4). The percentage biodegradation was calculated by dividing the concentration of individual compounds relative to that of 17α(72),25β(72)-hopane at the end of the experiment by the concentrations relative to that of 17α(72),25β(72)-hopane at the start of the experiment. Statistical analysis of data on oil chemistry, inorganic nutrients, and carbon dioxide evolution.Statistical analysis (parametric two-way analysis of variance, Pearson correlation) was performed by using Systat 7.0 (SPSS Inc.). DNA extraction, PCR, and DGGE analysis.DNA was extracted from 0.5-g samples (Table 1) by using the bead beating method described by Curtis and Craine with a Mikrodismembrator-U (B. Braun Biotech) (10). PCR was performed in a total volume of 50 μl containing 0.2 μM primer Vf-GC (corresponding to positions 341 to 358 of the Escherichia coli 16S rRNA [31]), 0.2 μM primer Vr (corresponding to positions 534 to 517 of the E. coli 16S rRNA [31]), 0.2 mM deoxynucleoside triphosphates, 1 U of BioTaq enzyme and the buffer supplied with the enzyme (Bioline, London, United Kingdom), and 1 μl of template DNA. Amplification was performed by using a Hybaid Omnigene Thermocycler as follows: 95°C for 3 min, followed by 30 cycles of 94°C for 0.5 min, 55°C for 1 min, and 72°C for 1 min, with a final elongation of 72°C for 10 min. DGGE was performed with the Bio-Rad DCode system. The PCR product was loaded onto 1-mm-thick 10% (wt/vol) polyacrylamide (37.5:1 acrylamide-bisacrylamide) gels containing a 30 to 60% linear denaturing gradient. One hundred percent denaturant is 7 M urea and 40% (vol/vol) deionized formamide. Gels were run in 1× TAE buffer (40 mM Tris-acetate, 1 mM Na-EDTA, pH 8.0) at 60°C and 200 V for 3.5 h. Gels were stained in 1× TAE buffer containing SYBR Green I (diluted 1:10,000; Sigma) and photographed under UV transillumination. Statistical analysis of DGGE tracks.Scanned negatives were analyzed by using Quantity One 4.1 software (Bio-Rad, Hercules, Calif.), and data were exported to Excel and analyzed in Systat 7.0 (SPSS Inc.). Similarities between tracks were calculated by using the Dice coefficient (band based) or the Pearson product-moment correlation coefficient (whole densitometric curve based) (34). Since cluster analysis of the resulting similarity matrices does not allow conclusions to be drawn regarding the statistical significance of differences between clusters or groups of samples (38), similarity coefficients from matrices were assigned to different groups and subsequently tested to determine whether their means were significantly different. Nonparametric analysis of variance (Mann-Whitney U test) was applied since similarity coefficients are not necessarily normally distributed (38). Cloning, sequencing, and phylogenetic analysis of 16S rDNA.Almost full-length 16S rRNA gene fragments were amplified by using primers pA and pH′ (12). Except for the primers, the PCR conditions were similar to those described above. PCR products were cloned by using the AdvanTAge kit (Clontech, Palo Alto, Calif.), and the 16S rRNA gene libraries were screened by amplified ribosomal DNA restriction analysis (ARDRA). The number of clones screened from each library is given in Table 1. E. coli clones were categorized into different ARDRA types based upon the pattern obtained on simultaneous digestion (3 h, 37°C) with the restriction enzymes RsaI and HaeIII (5 U of each). Sequencing of several clones corresponding to dominantly occurring ARDRA types revealed that these ARDRA groups were internally homogeneous (data not shown). ARDRA types were named X-Yd-Z, in which X refers to the type of microcosm (Table 1), Y is the day of sampling (0, 6, or 26), and Z is the number of a representative clone in the clone library of the particular microcosm and sampling date. 