2001; Wilkes et al., 2003; Callaghan et al., 2006 ; Widdel et al., 2006). The net reaction of alkane addition to fumarate is exergonic (ΔG°′ < 0), thus indicating that there is no needs for exogenous energy (such as ATP hydrolysis) for this reaction to proceed (Rabus et al. 2001). Similar observations were made with the formation of benzylsuccinate from toluene and fumarate (Biegert et al. 1996). Such a reaction has also been demonstrated for the initial activation of short chain alkanes (butane and propane) in the sulfate reducing strain BuS5 and in the enrichment culture Propane60-GuB derived from marine sediments. On the basis of metabolites detected in both cultures, butane was specifically activated at the sub-terminal carbon atom to yield (1-methylpropyl)succinate and propane was activated at both the sub-terminal and at one of the terminal carbon atoms to produce isopropyl- and n-propylsuccinate ( Kniemeyer et al. 2007). Based on current knowledge, the anaerobic activation pattern of propane occurs in other sulfidogenic enrichment cultures (Savage et al. 2010) as well as in hydrocarbons-rich environments ( Duncan et al., 2009 ; Gieg et al., 2010). Also, cyclic alkanes investigated to date are exclusively activated through addition to fumarate for further degradation under anoxic conditions ( Rios-Hernandez et al., 2003 ; Musat et al., 2010). The formation of alkyl- or cyclic-branched succinates as catabolic intermediates is, by analogy to the well established formation of benzylsuccinate as initial activation product of anaerobic toluene metabolism, catalyzed by strictly anaerobic glycyl radical enzymes (Widdel et al., 2006 ; Heider, 2007). Therefore, these glycyl radical enzymes have been termed alkylsuccinate synthase or (1-methylalkyl)succinate synthase (Ass or Mas) for n-alkanes and we suggest (cycloalkyl)succinate synthase (Cas) for cycloalkanes. This is a novel class of glycyl radical enzymes affiliated to the superfamily pyruvate-formate lyase (PFL) and type III ribonucleotide reductase (RNR) ( Leuthner et al., 1998 ; Widdel et al., 2006). The genes encoding the candidate alkylsuccinate synthase (assA or masD) have recently been identified in alkane degraders’ sulfidogenic bacteria D. alkenivorans AK-01 ( Callaghan et al. 2008) and Desulfoglaeba alkanedexens ALDCT (Callaghan et al. 2010) as well as in nitrate reducing strains HxN1 (Grundmann et al. 2008) and OcN1 (Zedelius et al. 2010), all affiliated to the Proteobacteria ( Fig. 1 ; Fig. 2). Interestingly, assA-like genes were also detected in methanogenic octacosane (C28H58) degrading enrichment cultures; which could indicate a possible implication of fumarate in the initial activation of alkanes under methanogenic conditions (Callaghan et al. 2010). 7.2. Alkane activation via carboxylation This second activation strategy was mainly developed from the growth pattern of the sulfidogenic strain Hxd3. On the basis of metabolite analysis, C-even and C-odd cellular fatty acids were formed from C-odd and C-even n-alkanes, respectively ( Aeckersberg et al., 1998 ; So et al., 2003). Growth of Hxd3 with different chain lengths of non-labeled alkanes in the presence of H13CO3− resulted in the formation of fatty acids that are one carbon atom shorter than the original alkane. Furthermore, their (fatty acids) carboxyl group contains a 13C atom suggesting that H13CO3− was directly involved in the initial activation of alkanes in strain Hxd3. Therefore, strain Hxd3 would metabolize an alkane to fatty acids via carboxylation with inorganic carbon (HCO3−/CO2), most likely at C-3, with subsequent removal of two sub-terminal carbon atoms from the alkane chain (Fig. 