2008). Thus, the principal route whereby oil alkanes are converted to methane was assumed to involve syntrophic alkane conversion to acetate and hydrogen linked to syntrophic acetate oxidation to H2 and CO2 and coupled with methanogenesis from CO2-reduction—the so called MADCOR process. This assumption is supported by modeling of isotopic signatures for CO2 and methane gases collected from heavily degraded oils of the mesothermic Peace River Oil Sands (Western Canada) suggesting that hydrogenotrophic methanogenesis (∼75–92%) likely predominates in subsurface degraded oil reservoirs (Jones et al. 2008). Furthermore, the main occurrence of CO2-reducing methanogens in oil reservoirs production waters and in enrichments derived from there also suggest that hydrogenotrophic methanogenesis may predominates in petroleum reservoirs ( Magot et al., 2000; Orphan et al., 2000 ; Grabowski et al., 2005). In addition, there is evidence indicating that in most cases methanogenesis from acetate in oil reservoirs production waters is driven primarily through syntrophic acetate oxidation to H2 and CO2 coupled to methanogenesis from CO2-reduction ( Nazina et al., 2006 ; Mayumi et al., 2010). More recently, the archaeal community composition observed in the thermophilic enrichment derived from oilfield production fluids with the ability to convert oil alkanes to methane was only represented by hydrogen-oxidizers affiliated with the family Methanobacteriaceae; while bacterial community was dominated by fermentative and/or syntrophic organisms affiliating with the orders Thermotogales, Synergistales, Deferribaterales and Firmicutes. These results again support the assumption of the major role of methanogenic CO2-reduction involved in the decomposition of oil alkanes in subsurface petroleum reservoirs (Gieg et al. 2010). Furthermore, since acetoclastic methanogenesis is likely inhibited upon exposure to 10 % (v/v) of crude oil (the oil was collected at a site contaminated by crude oil and creosote) (Warren et al. 2004) and in situations where acetoclastic methanogenesis might be limited/or absent, syntrophic acetate oxidation coupled to methanogenesis from CO2-reduction is thermodynamically favored, offering the greatest window of opportunity for the successful methanogenic decomposition of oil alkane ( Karakashev et al., 2006 ; Dolfing et al., 2008). Overall, these findings indicate that the particular methanogenic route of oil alkane is likely dictated by the sampling source of the microbial community and when appropriate, thermodynamics should take into account the contribution of biological factors (Zwolinski et al., 2000 ; Dolfing et al., 2008). Other studies have demonstrated that alkanes depletion is coupled to methane production, indicating the presence of microbial communities syntrophically converting alkanes to methane (Anderson and Lovley, 2000; Grossi et al., 2000; So and Young, 2001; Townsend et al., 2003 ; Siddique et al., 2006). 6. Other electrons acceptors Anaerobic oxidation of organic substrates coupled to sulfate and nitrate reduction yields relatively less amount of energy, particularly when compared to oxidation with oxygen as the electron acceptor. It might be possible that other electron acceptors such as perchlorate and nitrite could be coupled to anaerobic oxidation of alkanes. Perchlorate and chlorate as well as nitrite are ideal electron acceptors for microorganisms due to their high redox potentials (ClO4−/Cl−, E0 = +1.287 V; ClO3−/Cl−, E0 = +1.03 V; 2NO2−/N2, E0 = +0.958 V; 2NO/N2, E0 = +1.264; N2O/N2 = +1.355 V) ( Coates and Achenbach, 2004 ; Zedelius et al., 2010). Indeed, Mehboob et al. (2009) recently reported that Pseudomonas chloritidismutans AW-1T, isolated from sludge of an anaerobic chlorate-reducing bioreactor, was able to use n-decane as the sole carbon and energy source under strictly anaerobic conditions with chlorate as electron acceptor ( Table 2). Perchlorate and chlorate reduction, which are only induced under anoxic conditions, proceed according to the equation described in Fig. 3C. Molecular oxygen generated during the dismutation or disproportionation of chlorite (ClO2− → Cl− + O2; ΔG° = −148.4 kJ/mol) is subsequently used to oxidize the alkane substrate. Hence the degradation of alkanes under such conditions is assumed to proceed by means of oxygenases under unusual anaerobic process. Here chlorate is not only the electron acceptor but also the oxygen supplier for oxygenases activities (Mehboob et al. 2009). Given that high concentrations of dissolved oxygen are known to inhibit perchlorate and chlorate reduction (Xu et al. 2004), free oxygen generated as an intermediate must be promptly consumed so that it does not accumulate to high levels. In addition, P. chloritidismutans AW-1T is able to use nitrate as an electron acceptor, however in such situation no growth was observed with n-decane. This shows that oxidation of alkanes coupled to chlorate reduction is a particular physiological feature for strain AW-1T. 