Methods and Results:  We identified the microbial community in groundwater samples from a benzene-contaminated aquifer situated below a petrochemical plant. Eleven out of twelve groundwater samples with in situ dissolved oxygen concentrations between 0 and 2·57 mg l−1 showed benzene degradation in aerobic microcosm experiments, whereas no degradation in anaerobic microcosms was observed. The lack of aerobic degradation in the remaining microcosm could be attributed to a pH of 12·1. Three groundwaters, examined by 16S rRNA gene clone libraries, with low in situ oxygen concentrations and high benzene levels, each had a different dominant aerobic (or denitrifying) population, either Pseudomonas, Polaromonas or Acidovorax species. These groundwaters also had syntrophic organisms, and aceticlastic methanogens were detected in two samples. The alkaline groundwater was dominated by organisms closely related to Hydrogenophaga. Significance and Impact of the Study:  These findings will help to guide the treatment of contaminated groundwaters, and raise questions about the extent to which aerobes and anaerobes may interact to effect benzene degradation. Benzene is derived from fossil fuels, particularly petroleum, and reforming of straight-chain alkanes, as well as from incomplete combustion in volcanoes, cigarette smoke and forest fires, and is a ubiquitous highly toxic and carcinogenic organic environmental pollutant. It is both highly volatile (vapour pressure of 56 mmHg at 12°C) and relatively soluble in water (∼1·6 g l−1 at the temperature of UK groundwaters, 12°C), and so disperses readily in air and water, creating a global threat to watercourses and drinking water supplies, with some 110 tonnes released into UK waters alone in 2001 (Environment Agency 2004), so there is an urgent need to understand its fate in the environment. Microbes – particularly aerobic microbes – able to degrade benzene are readily isolated from water and soil. In subterranean environments where volatilization is minimal, the primary means of benzene attenuation is microbial biodegradation. However, as well as serving as a carbon source for some microbes, benzene creates a toxic and stressful environment for all organisms, and there is presently only fragmented information on the efficacy of microbial degradation in the removal of this pollutant from contaminated sites. Here we investigate groundwater beneath the Site for Innovative Research in Natural Attenuation (SIReN), where petrochemical processing over decades has left a legacy of hydrocarbon pollutants, most notably benzene. We have previously shown that microbial community compositions of groundwater samples from several different uncontaminated wells were similar, whereas those of benzene-contaminated groundwaters, sampled from different wells, were very different from each other and were less diverse (Fahy et al. 2005). It was concluded, on the basis of correspondence analysis of microbial communities and physicochemical parameters, that change in redox conditions driven by benzene oxidation, rather than benzene stress/toxicity, was the principal parameter shaping the composition of microbial communities of benzene-contaminated groundwaters (Fahy et al. 2005). It was also shown that aerobic benzene-degrading bacteria could be enriched from contaminated groundwaters with very low in situ oxygen concentrations, and T-RFLP experiments hinted that typically aerobic microbes were relatively abundant in situ (Fahy et al. 2006). In order to test this idea, in the present study we analysed the in situ microbial communities in four benzene-contaminated groundwaters by bacterial and archaeal 16S RNA gene clone libraries, and examined the potential for anaerobic as well as aerobic benzene degradation. We found phylotypes typical of both aerobic and anaerobic microbes in heavily contaminated groundwaters, and conclude that oxygen, even at low concentrations, plays an important role in the natural attenuation process by initiating benzene biodegradation, but that anaerobes may also be involved in degradation, using a variety of other terminal electron acceptors. Furthermore, we found that at pH 12 no benzene degradation was detectable. These findings have significant consequences for pollution management decisions, in particular whether to exploit natural attenuation or to use intervention strategies. This study of hydrocarbon-contaminated groundwater from the SIReN focuses on 12 wells showing different physicochemical characteristics and levels of contamination nominally classified as high, low or clean (Table 1). A detailed description of the site was reported previously (Jones et al. 2001; Fahy et al. 2005), and the relative position of the groundwater samples is indicated in Fig. 1. Groundwater was sampled on 15 April 2003. 