A real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR) method to quantify the proportion of microorganisms containing alkane monooxygenase was developed and used to follow changes in the microbial community in hydrocarboncontaminated Antarctic soil during a bioremediation field trial. Assays for the alkB and rpoB genes were validated and found to be both sensitive and reproducible (less than 2% intrarun variation and 25–38% interrun variation). Results from the real-time PCR analysis were compared to analysis of the microbial population by a culture-based technique [most probable number (MPN) counts]. Both types of analysis indicated that fertilizer addition to hydrocarbon-contaminated soil stimulated the indigenous bacterial population within 1 year. The proportion of alkB containing microorganisms was positively correlated to the concentration of n-alkanes in the soil. After the concentration of n-alkanes in the soil decreased, the proportion of alkane-degrading microorganisms decreased, but the proportion of total hydrocarbon-degrading microorganisms increased, indicating another shift in the microbial community structure and ongoing biodegradation. The ability to accurately quantify functional genes in the environment is an important step in understanding many ecological processes. Existing techniques include hybridization methods such as dot blots, and end-point polymerase chain reaction (PCR) methods such as competitive PCR and most probable number (MPN)- PCR. Although these methods are useful, hybridization methods are often only semiquantitative and end-point PCR methods require many reactions and a post-PCR analysis step, making them both labor-intensive and expensive. Real-time PCR is fast becoming the most popular alternative (see [11, 16, 32] for a detailed description). Originally developed for gene expression studies, it has found many applications in microbial ecology. These include the measurement of 16S rRNA genes as a measure of total and specific cell populations [21], the measurement of catabolic genes such as bssA [2] and atz [5] and the measurement of genes for important ecological processes such as denitrification [13] and ammonia oxidation [17]. The advantages that real-time PCR offers include speed, sensitivity, accuracy, simplicity, and the possibility of robotic automation. As with all new technologies, there is a need to explore and define the limitations of the method in terms of its sensitivity, accuracy, and reproducibility. Although the sensitivity and accuracy of realtime PCR assays are usually well characterized (e.g., [2]), few studies provide any data on the reproducibility of the method. Dionisi et al. [6] reported intra- and interrun variability and Hristova et al. [14] reported the reproducibility per sample. A recent study by Smith et al. [22] with the 16S rRNA gene found that the absolute gene copy numbers were influenced by a number of factors including the DNA isolation method and template concentration. Their observation that the intrarun variability was low (3–5%) but interrun variability was higher (11– Correspondence to: Shane M. Powell; E-mail: shane.powell@aad.gov.au 26%) agrees with the conclusions of Dionisi et al. [6]. DOI: 10.1007/s00248-006-9131-z & Volume 52, 523–532 (2006) & Springer Science+Business Media, Inc. 2006 523 Information on the reproducibility of real-time PCR methods is particularly important given that the relationship between the signal produced (the threshold cycle CT) and concentration values for the amount of the target is a log-linear one described by the equation: CT log target concentration B where M is the slope of the standard curve and B is the Y intercept. This log-linear relationship has the effect of producing large variations in concentrations between replicates despite the fact that the raw signal is very similar. This suggests that caution should be used when drawing conclusions from small differences, especially when the number of replicates (n) is small. This effect was noted by Dionisi et al. [6], who reported that coefficient of variation (CV = standard deviation/ mean) values calculated on the CT were much lower than those calculated on copy number of the target gene (2% compared to between 20% and 36%). As part of our investigations into the biodegradation of diesel spills in Antarctica, we wished to measure the activity of alkane-degrading microbes in soil samples. The alkane monooxygenases are a group of enzymes that catalyze the first step in the aerobic degradation of alkanes. 