The genetics of these enzymes are well characterized, particularly in Pseudomonas [25, 26] and Rhodococcus [28]. The alkB gene in particular has been found in isolates from a variety of genera, including Pseudomonas [25], Rhodococcus [29], Alcanivorax [10], and Xanthobacter [27], and it has also been detected by hybridization methods in environmental samples [30]. Alkane monooxygenases have been detected using hybridization methods in Antarctic and Brazilian soils [15] and in both contaminated and pristine Arctic and Antarctic soils [30]. A more quantitative MPN-PCR method was used to follow populations of alkane-degrading microbes in seawater microcosms [20], and Heiss-Blanquet et al. [12] used a competitive PCR method to correlate alkB levels to n-heptane degradation in freshwater and soil samples. All these studies, however, utilized several primer sets to target different types of alkane monooxygenases. To the best of our knowledge, no simple and quantitative method of measuring alkB in complex environmental samples using one assay has been reported. In this work, we present the development and validation of a real-time PCR method for the alkB and rpoB genes. We examined the effect of nutrient addition on microbial communities in a bioremediation field trial of hydrocarbon-contaminated, nutrient-poor Antarctic soil. We hypothesized that hydrocarbon-degrading bacteria, having a source of carbon not available to other heterotrophic bacteria, would be preferentially stimulated by the addition of nutrients. To test this, we used a combination of molecular (real-time PCR) and culture-based techniques to examine changes in the function of microbial communities in this bioremediation field trial. Bioremediation Field Trial. A landfarming bioremediation field trial was carried out at Australia’s Old Casey Station, East Antarctica, from 1998 to 2004, and has been previously described in detail [8]. Soil in the area was contaminated with 36,000 L of Special Antarctic Blend (SAB) diesel in 1982 [23]. The field trial consisted of sieved (4.75 mm) and homogenized soil in clean metal containers. The containers were freedraining, but partially buried to simulate natural field conditions while mitigating the effects of lateral fuel migration. Each treatment was applied to four containers. In the current study, we were interested in the effects of fertilization treatments [addition of two amounts of controlled release nutrients: a low concentration (LCRN) to yield ca. 200 NO3. Design of Primers to Detect the Alkane Monooxygenase Gene alkB. Primers were designed to amplify a fragment of the alkane monooxygenase gene alkB. Sequences (accession numbers are shown in Table 1) were obtained from the GenBank database and aligned. Regions of similar nucleotide composition were identified, and the NetPrimer program (http://www.premierbiosoft.com/ netprimer/netprimer.html) was used to assist in choosing the best primer pair that resulted in a PCR product of approximately 100 bp. This gene is not well conserved, and to compensate several degenerate bases were incorporated in the primers. The forward primer f(alkBFd) is 50 The primers were synthesized by Geneworks (Hindmarsh, South Australia) and initially tested against two strains of alkane-degrading Rhodococci (Rhodococcus fascians JCM 10002 and R. rhodochrous JCM 3202) and an Escherichia coli strain (as a negative control) using the HotStar PCR kit (Qiagen). Amplification from genomic DNA preparations resulted in a single band of approximately 100 bp from the two rhodococci, but no bands were obtained from the E. coli. DNA from a soil sample (BR106 from the field trial described above) was subjected to the same amplification and the resulting product was cloned using the TOPO-TA cloning kit (Invitrogen). Plasmids were extracted by using the UltraClean miniplasmid prep kit (MoBio) and the clones were sequenced with the provided M13 primer using the DTCS QuickStart kit (BeckmanCoulter) and a CEQ8000 genetic analysis system (Beckman-Coulter). An additional set of nondegenerate primers was developed based on the results of this clone library. 