However, by 2004 the control had significantly more copies of alkB g–1 soil. Between 2000 and 2004, there has been a significant increase in the number of copies of alkB g–1 soil in the control and also a significant decrease in both the treatments. The correlation between the number of copies of alkB g–1 soil and the concentration of n-alkanes suggests that this is probably because the control treatment is the only one with n-alkanes remaining. Sei et al. [20] measured the degradation of alkanes in seawater microcosms over 60 days and observed that an increase in the level of alk 530 S.M. POWELL ET AL. MICROBIAL ECOLOGY OF BIOREMEDIATION IN ANTARCTICA genes preceded the degradation of alkanes. This was followed by a decrease in the level of alk genes after the alkanes had been degraded in a manner similar to the observations made in this study. In Fig. 2E, it can be seen that the proportion of the population that carries the alkB gene has decreased significantly in all treatments, most particularly in the HCRN treatment 5 years after the fertilizer was applied. In the 2000 samples (1 year after application), the HCRN treatment has the smallest proportion of alkB-containing organisms and also the least amount of n-alkanes remaining. The addition of fertilizer has most likely stimulated the growth of bacteria that have an available carbon source and are able to compete for the nutrients. After 1 year the HCRN treatment contained very low levels of n-alkanes; the most easily utilized hydrocarbon source has been depleted. The microbial community may have been dominated by alkane degraders earlier in the year, but by the time the samples were collected, the community had already adapted to the use of other hydrocarbon as a carbon source. This demonstrates the ability of microorganisms to quickly respond to changing conditions even in this environment, which is frozen for much of the year. It would be interesting to follow the levels of alkB over much smaller time intervals to gain a better appreciation of the speed at which the microbial community adapts. Although there are no significant differences (p 9 0.15) between any groups in the alkane-degrading MPN data, there are significantly more SAB-degrading bacteria in the fertilized treatments than in the control in 2004 (Fig. 2H). This continued increase in the numbers of SAB-degrading bacteria suggests that a population capable of degrading nonalkane components of the diesel are able to successfully compete for nutrients after the easily degradable alkanes have been consumed and are now increasing in number. In terms of overall bioremediation of the site, this is very encouraging as the total petroleum hydrocarbon content of the soil 5 years after the addition of fertilizer is still approximately 2000–6000 mg kg–1 soil in 2004 [18]. These genes have been previously detected in both pristine and contaminated Antarctic soils from areas distant from Casey Station [15], and so would appear to be widespread in the Antarctic terrestrial environment. However, this does not mean that this is the only degradative pathway operating. Work by van Beilen et al. [28] showed that cytochrome P450 belonging to the CYP153 family could confer the ability to degrade medium-chain length alkanes on recombinant strains. Although hydrocarbon degradation by anaerobic processes does occur in this soil [18], we did not consider these processes in this study as they are unlikely to contribute significantly to biodegradation in the surface portion of the soil profile. The examination of the microbial community in the bioremediation field trial revealed that fertilization stimulated the different groups of investigated bacteria. Initially, the alkane-degrading bacteria are able to dominate the hydrocarbon-degrading population, but after the easily degraded alkanes have become scarce, other bacteria able to utilize different hydrocarbons dominate the population. This suggests that fertilization will continue to promote biodegradation of the SAB diesel even after the most easily degraded components have disappeared. In this study, we found that real-time PCR was more reproducible, less labor-intensive, and quicker than culture-based techniques once the assays had been developed. 