Phospholipid fatty acid (PLFA) analysis of a soil microbial community was coupled with 13C isotope tracer analysis to measure the community’s response to addition of 35 μg of [13C]toluene ml of soil solution−1. After 119 h of incubation with toluene, 96% of the incorporated13C was detected in only 16 of the total 59 PLFAs (27%) extracted from the soil. Of the total 13C-enriched PLFAs, 85% were identical to the PLFAs contained in a toluene-metabolizing bacterium isolated from the same soil. In contrast, the majority of the soil PLFAs (91%) became labeled when the same soil was incubated with [13C]glucose. Our study showed that coupling13C tracer analysis with PLFA analysis is an effective technique for distinguishing a specific microbial population involved in metabolism of a labeled substrate in complex environments such as soil. Toluene is a widespread pollutant that biodegrades rapidly relative to many other organic pollutants in both oxic and anoxic environments. Toluene degradation pathways have been studied almost exclusively in Pseudomonas species (23, 30, 38, 39, 43); however, other gram-negative and gram-positive toluene-degrading bacteria (1, 12, 19, 21, 27, 33,35) and fungi (36, 40) have been described. Despite extensive research on toluene biodegradation in soil and groundwater (5, 6, 11, 32, 34) and in pure cultures isolated from such environments, previous studies have provided little evidence directly linking the disappearance of the pollutant to specific populations of microorganisms in complex environments. The ability to identify populations actively involved in biodegradation in natural environments would greatly improve our ability to model pollutant degradation. Most kinetic models require the physiological characteristics and population densities of the organisms carrying out biodegradation (10,31), which clearly requires knowledge of the population(s) involved in the process. The polar lipid fraction of soils and other environmental samples is composed primarily of the phospholipid fatty acids (PLFA) of the viable microorganisms present (37). For complex matrices such as soil, PLFA analysis has been shown to be a valuable tool for detecting changes in microbial communities in response to heavy-metal pollution (13, 25, 42), hydrocarbon pollution (26, 29, 31), and different agricultural management regimes (3, 41). Recently, PLFA analysis has been combined with 13C-labeled substrates and compound-specific isotope analysis in order to link indigenous populations with metabolism of specific substrates via PLFA biomarkers (2). Our laboratory has previously investigated the biodegradation of toluene, as well as toluene-induced trichloroethylene cometabolism, by indigenous microbial populations in a surface soil (Yolo silt loam) (11, 22). Development of a model describing the coupled diffusive transport and biodegradation of toluene and trichloroethylene in columns of Yolo silt loam indicated the need for a better understanding of the microbial populations responsible for toluene degradation (8, 10). The primary objective of our study was to identify the indigenous population(s) responsible for toluene disappearance in Yolo silt loam. To this end we employed traditional culture-based approaches as well as PLFA and 13C-PLFA methods not affected by the biases associated with laboratory cultivation. Chemicals.Reagent grade toluene and chemicals used in the phospholipid extraction and purification steps (all Fisher Optima grade) were obtained from Fisher Scientific (Fair Lawn, N.J.). Ring-labeled [13C]toluene (99 atom%) and uniformly labeled [13C]glucose (99 atom%) were obtained from Isotech Inc. (Miamisburg, Ohio). All solutions were prepared with NANOpure water (Series 550; Barnstead/Thermolyne Corp., Dubuque, Iowa). Soil.The top 15 cm of Yolo silt loam (31% sand, 50% silt, 19% clay) was collected from a fallow agricultural plot at the Student Farm of the University of California, Davis. Samples were passed through a 2-mm-pore-size sieve, and the soil moisture was brought to 14% (determined gravimetrically). The soil was stored in double polyethylene bags at 4°C to preserve biological activity. The organic-matter content was determined to be 1.81% by the Walkley-Black wet-combustion method. Total mineral N was 59 μg g of soil−1, and mineral P was 19 μg g of soil−1. All analyses were performed by the Division of Agriculture and Natural Resources Analytical Laboratory at the University of California, Davis. Biodegradation assays.Triplicate 50-g (dry weight) soil microcosms were spiked with 10, 20, 50, or 100 μg of toluene ml of soil solution−1 (accounting for partitioning into the vapor phase and sorption to the soil particles; Henry’s law constant, 0.27; sorption partition coefficient [Koc], 200 [11]) and incubated at 25°C in the dark. Biodegradation was measured by gas chromatographic (GC) analysis of headspace concentrations as described earlier (22). When toluene was no longer detectable in the microcosms, samples were frozen for subsequent PFLA analysis. 