Microbial enumeration and identification were carried out on several oil contaminated soil samples collected from gasoline and diesel stations. Bacteria were the most dominant microbiota and were therefore classified to generic level. Eleven main genera were detected and Corynebacterium was the predominant genus in all the samples. Biochemical characterisation and substrate utilisation showed high percentage of lipolytic ability combined with high inorganic nitrogen utilisers. The ability of these cultures to degrade crude oil was tested individually and in mixed bacterial consortium at different temperatures and pH values. Maximum crude oil biodegradation of 78% was achieved using a bacterial consortium containing five cultures (Micrococcus sp. GS2-22, Corynebacterium sp. GS5-66, Flavobacterium sp. DS5-73, Bacillus sp. DS6-86 and Pseudomonas sp. DS10-129) with 1% crude oil at 30oC and pH 7.5. Such a consortium may be useful for bioaugmentation of oil contaminated environments. Petroleum continues to serve as the principle source of energy. Wide scale production, transport, use and disposal of petroleum globally has made it a lead contaminant in both prevalence and quantity in the environment. As a result of the increase in automobiles, the number of gasoline/diesel stations and automobile service stations is ever increasing. In gasoline, diesel stations and service stations, oil is spilled during transfer and servicing operations. During accidental spills, action will be taken to remove or remediate or recover the contaminant immediately, whereas in the gasoline and diesel stations the spills due to leakage may be small but continuous and prolonged. Because of its persistence, the chance for groundwater contamination is greater. The addition of hydrocarbons to an ecosystem may result in a selective increase in microorganisms capable of utilising the hydrocarbons and those that are capable of utilising metabolites produced by the hydrocarbon-utilisers (Venkateswaran et al. 1995; Ferrari et al. 1996). The enhancement or reduction will depend upon the chemical composition of the contaminating hydrocarbons and on the species of microorganisms present within the microbial community of the particular ecosystem (Atlas 1995). The Gulf War and an increasing trend in tanker accidents have focussed attention on the problem of hydrocarbon contamination in the environment. The traditional methods to cope with oil spills are mainly through physical containment and collection using floating booms, applications of adsorbents such as straw, shredded polyurethane or porous volcanic glasses and/or dispersal by detergents (Ollis 1992). Biological methods have an edge over the physico-chemical treatment regimes in removing spills as they offer in situ biodegradation of oil fractions by the microorganisms (Ferrari et al.1996) The fate of petroleum hydrocarbons in the environment, including biodegradation, is largely determined by abiotic factors, which influence the extent of weathering. This paper describes the microbial population and microbial diversity of samples from gasoline and diesel stations and explores the possibility of using selected bacterial cultures and bacterial consortium to degrade Bombay high crude oil at various environmental conditions. The soil samples (100g each) were collected from ten Gasoline spilled (GS) and diesel spilled (DS) stations for the isolation of oil degrading microorganisms. The samples were collected in pre-sterilised glass bottles and transported to the laboratory for analysis. Enumeration and isolation of heterotrophic bacteria, actinomycetes and fungi was carried out through serial dilution-agar plating technique using Nutrient agar, Kuster’s agar and Rose Bengal agar medium (HIMEDIA) respectively. 