The injector and detector temperatures were 120°C and 160°C, respectively, while the column temperature was 90°C. The carrier gas was nitrogen at a flow rate of 30 ml min−1. RNA-SIP of benzene-degrading bacteria.BTX have constantly been detected in groundwater sampled from well 29 during natural attenuation, with xylene concentrations consistently being higher than benzene and toluene concentrations (49). During this period, nitrate and sulfate concentrations in groundwater were below the detection limits (<0.1 mg liter−1), and the DO concentration was always below 0.5 mg liter−1 (49). The characteristics of the groundwater obtained for the present study are summarized in Table 1. Groundwater samples were supplemented with [13C6]benzene (200 μM, equivalent to approximately 16 mg liter−1) and an electron acceptor (nitrate, sulfate, or oxygen). Changes in concentrations of benzene and xylene are presented in Fig. 1. Toluene concentrations are not presented in this figure, since they were very low (Table 1) and were below the detection limit from day 7 on under all conditions. Figure 1 shows that benzene was degraded under all conditions, albeit relatively slowly under denitrifying and sulfidogenic conditions. Although xylene was rapidly degraded under aerobic conditions, no significant degradation was observed under sulfidogenic conditions. In the sterile controls, benzene and xylene were not significantly decreased (data not shown). During the 28-day incubation under denitrifying conditions, 1.8 mM of nitrate and 0.13 mM of oxygen (equivalent to 4.3 mg liter−1) were consumed in association with losses of 132 μM of benzene, 2.9 μM of toluene, and 78.3 μM of xylene. Assuming that all oxygen molecules were used for benzene degradation, this could result in the loss of 17.3 μM of benzene, as estimated according to equation 1: Formula(1) The remaining benzene plus toluene and xylene were likely degraded in association with denitrification. According to equations 2 to 4 (48), the degradation of these hydrocarbons could consume 1.4 mM of nitrate, which is 77.8% of the actual consumption of nitrate. Formula(2) Formula(3) Formula(4) The remaining nitrate may have been utilized for the oxidation of other undefined organic matters in the groundwater. This estimation indicates that a significant portion of benzene was degraded in association with denitrification. RNAs were extracted from the incubated groundwater at 7-day intervals (from day 0 to day 21), fractionated, and subjected to reverse transcription-PCR (RT-PCR) of 16S rRNA fragments (Fig. 2). Figure 2A confirms that the formation and fractionation of density gradients were successful. Based on known density values (37), we estimated that the 13C-RNA and 12C-RNA fractions were positioned around fractions 10 and 16, respectively. Figure 2B presents DGGE patterns of RT-PCR products from different fractions for denitrifying incubation on days 0 and 7. As shown in this figure, bacterial species that utilized [13C6]benzene were also detected in the 12C-RNA fraction, because the groundwater was originally contaminated with benzene. Total DGGE band intensities of these DGGE profiles were plotted in Fig. 2C. It is shown that only one peak was seen around the 12C-RNA fractions on day 0, while two peaks appeared around the 12C-RNA and 13C-RNA fractions on day 7. This observation indicates that 13C in benzene was incorporated into rRNA during the 7-day incubation under denitrifying conditions. Similarly, 13C incorporation within 7 days was also observed under aerobic and sulfidogenic conditions (data not shown). Figure 3 shows changes in DGGE patterns of the 13C-RNA fractions (corresponding to fraction 10 in Fig. 