Stable isotope probing (SIP) of benzene-degrading bacteria in gasoline-contaminated groundwater was coupled to denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis (DGGE) of DNA fragments amplified by reverse transcription-PCR from community 16S rRNA molecules. Supplementation of the groundwater with [13C6]benzene together with an electron acceptor (nitrate, sulfate, or oxygen) showed that a phylotype affiliated with the genus Azoarcus specifically appeared in the 13C-RNA fraction only when nitrate was supplemented. This phylotype was also observed as the major band in DGGE analysis of bacterial 16S rRNA gene fragments amplified by PCR from the gasoline-contaminated groundwater. In order to isolate the Azoarcus strains, the groundwater sample was streaked on agar plates containing nonselective diluted CGY medium, and the DGGE analysis was used to screen colonies formed on the plates. This procedure identified five bacterial isolates (from 60 colonies) that corresponded to the SIP-identified Azoarcus phylotype, among which two strains (designated DN11 and AN9) degraded benzene under denitrifying conditions. Incubation of these strains with [14C]benzene showed that the labeled carbon was mostly incorporated into 14CO2 within 14 days. These results indicate that the Azoarcus population was involved in benzene degradation in the gasoline-contaminated groundwater under denitrifying conditions. We suggest that RNA-based SIP identification coupled to phylogenetic screening of nonselective isolates facilitates the isolation of enrichment/isolation-resistant microorganisms with a specific function. Contamination of groundwater with gasoline is a serious environmental problem, since it may affect drinking water resources and has impacts on the oligotrophic environment. Benzene, toluene, and xylenes (BTX) are the major components of gasoline-derived contaminants and are of great concern because they are toxic (15) and soluble in water (16). Among them, benzene is of particular health concern due to its carcinogenicity (2, 53). Benzene is known to be biodegraded readily under aerobic conditions. However, contamination of subsurface aquifers with gasoline often results in the development of anaerobic zones (5, 13, 30), where benzene is particularly persistent. Many studies have therefore investigated anaerobic benzene degradation in the environment, showing that degradation occurs, albeit slowly, under nitrate-reducing (10, 11, 12, 14, 36, 51, 52), sulfate-reducing (17, 31), iron-reducing (6, 7, 23, 32, 33, 44), perchlorate-reducing (12, 14), and methanogenic conditions (21, 27, 52, 57). Although these studies have identified microbial populations occurring in these enrichments by using molecular techniques (40, 44, 52), no studies have succeeded in isolating benzene-degrading organisms from them. So far, only two bacterial isolates, both affiliated with the genus Dechloromonas, have been shown to anaerobically degrade benzene in axenic cultures (11, 12, 14), although they were isolated after enrichment on different substrates, such as 4-chlorobenzoate. We have been studying a gasoline-contaminated subsurface aquifer undergoing monitored natural attenuation. Geochemical analyses have suggested that intrinsic anaerobic BTX biodegradation has occurred in the aquifer ∼50 m downstream of the gasoline source area, where electron acceptors such as oxygen, nitrate, and sulfate were depleted, with corresponding reductions in BTX concentrations (49). Molecular ecological analyses have revealed that the community structures in the biodegradation zone are different from those in surrounding uncontaminated zones. Several phylotypes affiliated with the genus Azoarcus were detected as the major populations in the biodegradation zone (49). The present study was carried out to identify microorganisms degrading benzene in the gasoline-contaminated aquifer. Recently, scientists have developed culture-independent approaches for linking microbial community function to the phylogenetic identities of key organisms (9, 29, 37, 39). Stable isotope probing (SIP) is one such method, enabling the identification of members in a microbial community responsible for specific activities based on the incorporation of stable isotopes (e.g., 13C) into cellular components (34, 35, 37). This study used RNA-based SIP (RNA-SIP) to label and identify [13C6]benzene-degrading organisms. RNA-SIP exploits the relatively efficient 13C incorporation into RNA compared to that into DNA (20, 37), which is particularly useful when substrate degradation and growth rates are likely to be slow, as in the context of anaerobic benzene degradation. In addition, SIP information was confirmed by isolating RNA-SIP-identified bacteria and analyzing their benzene-degrading ability under denitrifying conditions. Groundwater sample.The gasoline-contaminated groundwater used in this study was obtained from a BTX-contaminated subsurface aquifer situated at Kumamoto, Japan, in March 2004. This aquifer has been subjected to monitored natural attenuation from April 2002, after the termination of a 10-year pumping/purge treatment (49). The groundwater sample was obtained from a shallow dug well (well 29) and stored in sterile glass bottles (1 liter) at 4°C during transportation to our laboratory (∼3 days). 