The persistence of the anthropogenic aromatics in the environment has caused great public alarm due to their toxicity, mutagenicity and bioconcentration in higher organisms (Hutzinger & Veerkamp 1981). Through government regulatory agencies and market pressures, industries are slowly modifying their processes to decrease aromatic emissions. Complete prevention of aromatic pollution has been proposed as a long term goal; however, there is still a great need to remediate the present discharges and aromatic pollution inherited from the past. The use of microorganisms to degrade aromatic pollution is an interesting lowcost approach for the treatment of industrial effluents, contaminated sediments, soil and groundwater. Typically, bioremediation is practised by providing favorable environmental conditions in order to stimulate the degradation of pollutants by naturally occurring microflora (Liu & Sulfita 1993). The biodegradative capacities must be developed by carefully selecting the correct combination of electron donors, electron acceptors and in the case of cometabolism, the choice of the primary substrate. Additionally, bioremediation usually entails the supplementation of limiting nutrients. Anaerobic or aerobic biodegradative capacities can be selected, depending on whether molecular oxygen is eliminated or supplied. In the biosphere, there is approximately a 40,000 times excess of molecular oxygen compared to organic carbon (Schink 1988a), indicating that most organic matter degradation occurs in aerobic environments. However, if organic pollution occurs in saturated environments, anaerobic degradation will most likely predominate due to the low solubility and slow mass transport of 02 in water. Aerobic conditions can only be maintained in such environments by intensive aeration; whereas anaerobic conditions are ensured by adding readily biodegradable organic matter resulting in rapid 02 uptake by heterotrophs. As will be discussed later, the consumption of oxygen by aerobes is often sufficient to create anaerobic microniches even in macroenvironments that are completely saturated with 02. In complex matrices such as soil, sediments and biofilms, anaerobic and aerobic microbial communities occur side by side (Kato et al. 1993a; Tiedje et al. 1984). The objectives of this review article are to contrast the biodegradative limitations of anaerobic and aerobic microbial consortia towards aromatic priority pollutants. Evidence demonstrating that the combined activity of both anaerobic and aerobic consortia can bring about the complete degradation of recalcitrant xenobiotic aromatics will be discussed. The combined biodegradation can be achieved in sequenced periods of operation or in reactors placed in series (Zitomer & Speece 1993). However, since anaerobic microniches are easily created and maintained in aerobic microbial environments, the basis for the development of synchronous anaerobic-aerobic bioremediation systems are elaborated. Aromatic compounds are susceptible to biodegradation under both aerobic and anaerobic conditions. In the aerobic processes, molecular oxygen is involved in two ways. Firstly, oxygen is incorporated in the aromatic ring by means of mono- and dioxygenases prior to ring-fission. Secondly, oxygen serves as the terminal electron acceptor of the reducing equivalents generated during the oxidation of the aromatic molecule. Under anaerobic conditions on the other hand, biochemical mechanisms which do not involve molecular oxygen function in the break down of aromatic compounds. As a consequence of this, some types of aromatic compounds are difficult to degrade anaerobically, in particular, aromatic compounds without functional groups (benzene, toluene, naphthalene, etc.). However, higher chlorinated aromatic compounds (e.g. hexachlorobenzene) are degraded better under anaerobic conditions. Different types of compounds can act as alternative terminal electron acceptors in the absence of 02, such as nitrate, sulfate, sulfur, oxidized metal ions (e.g. Fe 3+ and Mn4+), protons and bicarbonate. 