Anilines were also polymerized by lignin peroxidase and whole cultures of white-rot fungi (Chang & Bumpus 1993). Addition of chloroanilines to soil microcosms resulted in the formation of chloro-azobenzenes and chloro-azoxybenzenes (Bartha et al. 1968; Freitag et al. 1984), which is indicative of the first steps in the polymerization that finally leads to bound residue (Berry & Boyd 1985; Bollag et al. 1983; Freitag et al. 1984; Tatsumi et al. 1994). Also some aromatic amines resulting from the cleavage of azo dyes are potentially susceptible to oxidative coupling. Sulfanilic acid, arising from the cleavage of Orange-I, was polymerized in aerobic enrichment cultures (Kulla 1981). Aminophenols are rapidly autoxidized, 4-chloro-2-aminophenol was oxidized to dark non-biodegradable polymers at a rate of 12 #M d -1 in sterile pH 6.8 medium (Beunink & Rehm 1990). In the previous section we have learned that there are three major factors related to recalcitrance of aromatic pollutants in the environment. The choice of aerobic and anaerobic biotreatment systems cannot be used to influence the first factor, bioavailability, but it can be used to overcome the recalcitrance caused by the two other factors, namely, the intrinsic biodegradative limitations and the susceptibility for polymerization. Of particular interest is the fact that many compounds which are difficult to degrade aerobically, seem to be readily biotransformed anaerobically. In turn, the products of the anaerobic biotransformation resist further anaerobic mineralization; yet, they are good substrates for aerobic biodegradation. Thus for the total mineralization of many recalcitrant pollutants, a sequenced anaerobic-aerobic treatment strategy should be sought which uses the best of both worlds (Zitomer & Speece 1993). Table 4 summarizes the studies reported in the literature in which enhanced biodegradation of recalcitrant pollutants was obtained by sequencing the anaerobic and aerobic biodegradative capacities. Examples of the reactions occurring in the anaerobic and aerobic steps are illustrated in Fig. 6. The examples include pollutants which possess highly electron withdrawing chloro, nitro and azo groups and which were shown to be either recalcitrant or troublesome in aerobic biotreatment systems but readily reduced by anaerobic microorganisms. The aromatic rings of the reduced products are too nucleophilic for further reduction by anaerobes. The products are either troublesome or completely recalcitrant to mineralization in anaerobic environments, particularly methanogenic consortia. However, they are highly suited for the electrophilic attack by oxygenases of microorganisms in an aerobic post treatment step. Two studies report the sequenced treatment of 2,4,6-trichlorophenol. In anaerobic environments, this compound seems to be preferentially reductively dechlorinated in the ortho position, while 4- chlorophenol is troublesome but not recalcitrant to anaerobic biodegradation (Table 4). Thus in order to ensure high removal efficiencies of all chloro groups, a subsequent aerobic step is recommended. This principle has also been applied to the removal of chlorophenol mixtures in bleachery wastewaters (Table 4). Likewise AOX removal from the anaerobic treatment of chlorolignins in bleaching effluents is enhanced by 6 to 10% in subsequent aerobic post treatment (LaFond & Ferguson 1991); and the AOX removal by aerobic activated sludge is enhanced by 20% with prior anaerobic pretreatment (Ferguson 1994). The polychlorinated aromatic hydrocarbons represent an important group of environmental pollutants which are highly persistent in aerobic environments. The lower chlorinated aromatic hydrocarbons produced from their reductive dechlorination were shown to be virtually recalcitrant to further biotransformations in anaerobic environments. 