1993). The obligate anaerobic fermentative bacterium, Veillonella alcalescens, was maintained in a chemostat coculture with the obligate aerobe, Pseudomonas testosteroni when both were supplied with the common substrate lactic acid (Gerritse et al. 1990). Another anaerobic fermentative bacterium, Zymomonas mobil&, was able to convert glucose to ethanol in an aerated coculture with the fungus, Aspergillus awamori (Tanaka et al. 1986). In complex biofilms, anaerobic-aerobic cocultures can be maintained in 02 unlimited environments. Oxygen tolerant granular anaerobic sludge was able to convert from 3 to 25% of the ethanol substrate to methane in 3 days while at least 23 to 2 mg L-1 of dissolved oxygen prevailed in the medium (Kato et al. 1993a). Methane was produced in conditions where the 02 supply exceeded the substrate BOD supply by a factor of 11. This finding can only be explained by the occurrence of microaerophilic or anaerobic microniches deep inside the biofilm where the 02 content is so low that the aerobic respiration rate is limited due to the low oxygen flux. Ethanol and volatile fatty acids have higher aqueous solubilities than 02 and as such would consequently be expected to have higher diffusive mass transport into the biofilms than oxygen. Thus, these substrates could potentially penetrate the biofilm more than oxygen and be present in the anaerobic microniches at suitable concentrations. To test the hypothesis that methanogens can compete for substrate in 02 unlimited conditions for prolonged periods of time, methanogenic granular sludge was incubated in a repeated batch experiment with 18% 02 in the head space (Kato et al. 1993a). For 18 days, uptake of 02 occurred simultaneously with methane production while the dissolved oxygen concentration in the bulk media fluctuated between 2 and 6 mg L- 1 (Fig. 9). By the 10th day of this experiment, the methane produced started to become consumed by aerobic methanotrophic bacteria which had developed in the coculture. After 18 days of exposure to 02, healthy methanogenic activity was still evident when 02 was excluded from the head space. A conceptual model illustrating the aerobic and anaerobic zones in a sludge granule and the flow of substrates and products between these zones is illustrated in Fig. 10. Denitrification was also shown to occur in the anaerobic zones of biofilms recovered from an aerobic trickling filter treating municipal wastewater (Revsbech et al. 1989). The bulk liquid phase contained 6.4 mg L-1 of dissolved oxygen. However at a depth of several hundred #m, 02 was no longer detectable. Micro-profiles of denitrification were generated by detecting N20 in biofilms where the further reduction of this denitrification intermediate was inhibited with acetylene. The results obtained with this technique illustrated that denitrification was located in the anaerobic zone between a biofilm depth of 400 to 2000 #m. Photosynthesis, promoted by exposing the biofilm to light, inhibited denitrification due to the endogenous dissolved oxygen formed deep in the biofilm. The occurrence of anaerobic zones in aerobic biofilms was initially viewed as a disadvantageous rate limitation in the overall kinetics of aerobic bioconversions. However, this disadvantage can now be used to promote the complete biodegradation of typical recalcitrant xenobiotic aromatic compounds characterized by electron-withdrawing substituents. The anaerobic zones that develop in the biofilms can be used to house microorganisms displaying anaerobic activity towards the reduction of these xenobiotic substituents. 