Enumeration of oil-degrading bacteria.In the same sand samples for which detailed chemical analysis was performed (Table 3), MPN counts of cultivatable hydrocarbon-degrading bacteria in oil-contaminated sands (2.4 × 1010 cells ml−1) exceeded those from “clean” sands sampled in parallel by 3 to 4 orders of magnitude (2.4 × 106 to 9.3 × 106 cells ml−1). Enumeration of bacteria with quantitative molecular approaches corroborated cultivation-based evidence. rRNA gene abundances were determined for samples taken from all sampling trips, resulting in a data set of 468 sand samples. Counts of cultivatable hydrocarbon degraders paralleled the molecular quantification of bacterial rRNA gene abundance. In oiled sands that were analyzed for hydrocarbon content, bacterial rRNA gene abundance was ∼10 times higher in oiled (0.44 × 107 to 14.2 × 107 copies g−1) versus clean (0.024 × 107 to 1.57 × 107 copies g−1) sand. Alcanivorax spp. were not detected by qPCR methods in the clean sands used for MPN enumeration but were detected in Pensacola Beach sands without visible oil contamination. Alcanivorax were more abundant in sand samples with visible oil contamination (0.27 × 107 to 2.77 × 107 copies g−1) than in sands without visible oil contamination (0.12 × 105 to 8.9 × 105 copies g−1). Differences in total bacterial and Alcanivorax gene abundances between oiled and nonoiled sands are both statistically significant, as assessed by a Student t test on log-transformed data (P < 0.008). Principal component analysis was performed to investigate the effect of visible oil contamination and sampling date on bacterial abundances for the larger qPCR data set of 468 samples (Fig. 1). Total bacterial SSU rRNA gene abundance and Alcanivorax specific SSU rRNA gene abundance covaried and increased with respect to visible oil contamination (Fig. 1). The percent abundance of Alcanivorax did not covary with Alcanivorax SSU rRNA gene abundance. The percent abundance of Alcanivorax was strongly associated with oil presence in the earliest (2 July) sampling trip and weakly associated with oil contamination in the later trips. The first sampling trip was also characterized by a relatively small increase in total bacterial SSU rRNA gene abundance associated with oil contamination compared to later sampling trips. Linear regression analysis of the abundance of overall bacteria in comparison to the abundance of Alcanivorax spp. for each sampling trip supported observations from the principal component analysis (Fig. 2). During the July sampling trip, Alcanivorax spp. were most abundant and were shown to covary with the abundance of overall bacteria. In subsequent sampling trips, the abundance of Alcanivorax declined and did not strongly covary with overall bacterial abundance. Initially, the average percent composition of Alcanivorax gene copies comprised ca. 10% of the total bacterial gene copies, which fell to <1% in sampling trips after September 2010. Enrichment and isolation of oil-degrading bacteria.Bacteria capable of using source oil as the sole carbon and energy source were isolated from oiled beach sands under aerobic and anaerobic conditions (Table 4). Analysis of bacterial SSU rRNA gene sequences revealed that the characterized isolates belong to 14 genera from seven orders and four classes within three phyla (Proteobacteria, Firmicutes, and Actinobacteria). The majority of the isolates were identified as members of four orders (Oceanospirilalles, Alteromonadales, Vibrionales, and Pseudomonadales) within the class Gammaproteobacteria. A single isolate was identified from the Alphaproteobacteria. Two Gram-positive organisms were isolated from the phyla Firmicutes and Actinobacteria. 