Nearly all of the groups represented in our culture collection of oil-degrading bacteria were detected in pyrosequence libraries from oiled beach sands (Table 5). Alcanivorax spp., in particular, were shown to comprise the most abundant OTU in the pyrosequence libraries. Thus, the relative abundance of Alcanivorax OTU is overlaid on the NMDS plot, demonstrating a strong covariation with oil presence (Fig. 4). As a proxy for the metabolically active bacteria present in beach sands, RNA-based pyrosequence libraries were generated and compared to DNA-based libraries for four samples collected on July 2 and selected to represent a range in visual oil contamination (Fig. 5). RNA- and DNA-based libraries revealed similar patterns in community composition grouped at the class level, especially in the oiled samples. Members of the Gammaproteobacteria and Alphaproteobacteria were shown to dominate beach sand communities, regardless of oil presence (Fig. 5, Table 5). Alphaproteobacteria and Actinobacteria show a proportionately higher representation in the RNA-based libraries compared to the DNA-based in all samples. In the most heavily oiled sample, this increase in relative abundance of Alphaproteobacteria is due primarily to a single OTU in the family Rhodobacteraceae (Table 5). The overall goal of our research is to determine the environmental and ecological controls of hydrocarbon biodegradation under in situ conditions in coastal benthic environments impacted by the DH oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico. The oil degradation capacity of microbial populations in marine sediments is likely limited by stressors such as anoxia or nutrient starvation, as well as ecological interactions such as mutualistic production and exchange of biosurfactants between bacterial populations (27). Knowledge of bacterial community structure and the response of key microbial players in oil-contaminated environments provide a first glance at metabolic potential and the physiological mechanisms that might drive hydrocarbon degradation. Response of indigenous bacterial communities to oil contamination in marine sands.Microorganisms with the capacity to degrade hydrocarbons are among the best-studied microbial groups in applied and environmental microbiology. Indeed, more than 200 bacterial, algal, and fungal genera, encompassing over 500 species, have been recognized as capable of hydrocarbon degradation (see reviews by Head et al. [27] and Yakimov et al. [76]). Much progress has been made to determine the response of specific bacterial taxa to oil contamination in marine environments impacted by oil spills (for reviews, see references 4, 5, 23, 27, 42, and 50). However, our ability to understand and predict the dynamics of in situ bacterial communities responding to environmental stimuli such as the presence of oil contamination remains in its infancy (27, 60). The majority of previous work on hydrocarbon-degrading bacterial communities in the marine environment has been conducted under enrichment conditions in laboratory microcosms (12, 13, 45, 52, 57, 69, 75). Of the fewer studies that have been conducted in the field, most have focused on biostimulation, for instance the application of nutrients to enhance oil bioremediation (46, 49, 64, 68). Thus, a paucity of information exists on the response of indigenous bacterial communities to oil contamination under in situ or natural attenuation conditions (2, 36, 51). The DH oil spill disaster in the Gulf of Mexico has inspired a number of studies that address this knowledge gap, with most of them to date centered on bacterioplankton communities of the deep ocean (26, 37, 70). In our study, cultivation-based and molecular enumeration of bacterial communities showed a distinct impact of oil on overall bacterial numbers and specifically on the abundance of known oil degraders in Gulf beach sands. Not surprisingly, bacterial abundance increased as oil provides a major source of carbon and electrons in an otherwise nutrient-starved marine environment. Based on an extensive molecular data set from three field campaigns, we show that bacteria in Pensacola Beach sands were on average 2 to 4 orders of magnitude more abundant in the presence of oil contamination (Fig. 2 and 3); and high cultivatable counts as well as RNA-based analyses support the premise that the majority of bacteria in oiled sands are active. These results are consistent with past field research on oiled beaches (2, 46, 49, 63). 