This has been primarily a result of limitations imposed by available methods, which have, until recently, restricted the study of adaptation of microbial communities to the phenomenon of selective enrichment, in which the numbers or proportion of microorganisms that can utilize the compound of interest increase within the community and can be enumerated by their ability to grow on a medium containing the compound as the sole carbon source. The primary genetic mechanism for the adaptation of the microbial community is the amplification, by means of selective enrichment and gene transfer and mutation, of genes which are involved in the metabolism of the chemical contaminant (19, 129). Direct monitoring of this process with respect to adaptation to hydrocarbons has recently been made possible by the development of DNA probes specific for the genes encoding hydrocarbon-catabolic pathways (137). Sayler et al. (118), for example, using the colony hybridization technique, showed a correlation between the enhanced rates of PAH mineralization in oil-contaminated sediments and an increase in the number of colonies containing DNA sequences which hybridized to TOL (toluate oxidation) and NAH (naphthalene oxidation) plasmid probes. The colony hybridization procedure, however, has the disadvantage of requiring the growth of organisms on laboratory media, which limits sensitivity and does not allow detection of DNA sequences in viable but nonculturable microorganisms (116). Dot blot hybridization, in which DNA is extracted from environmental samples and then probed (68, 98), can be used to detect specific DNA sequences in the environment without the need for isolation and culture of microorganisms. The newly described polymerase chain reaction technique can improve the sensitivity of the dot blot method by 3 orders of magnitude, permitting the detection of 1 cell per g of sediment sample (130). The use of these methods in conjunction with nucleic acid probes for genes involved in hydrocarbon metabolism will allow measurement of the frequency of those genes within the microbial community (137). This will permit assessment of the relative degree of adaptation of the community as well as a more detailed analysis of the dynamics of gene amplification associated with adaptation. Plasmid DNA may play a particularly important role in genetic adaptation in that it represents a highly mobile form of DNA which can be transferred via conjugation or transformation and can impart novel phenotypes, including hydrocarbon-oxidizing ability, to recipient organisms. The pathways for the metabolism of naphthalene, salicylate, camphor, octane, xylene, and toluene have been shown to be encoded on plasmids in Pseudomonas spp. (39). Exposure of natural microbial populations to oil or other hydrocarbons may impose a selective advantage to strains possessing plasmids encoding enzymes for hydrocarbon catabolism, resulting in an overall increase in the plasmid frequency in the community. Indirect evidence for the role of plasmids in adaptation to hydrocarbons has been provided by some studies in which a greater frequency and/or multiplicity of plasmids has been observed among bacterial isolates from hydrocarbon-contaminated environments than among isolates from uncontaminated sites. Hada and Sizemore (64) screened 440 Vibrio isolates from an active oil field and a control site in the northwestern Gulf of Mexico for the presence of plasmid DNA and found a higher proportion of plasmid carriage (35 versus 23%) and multiple plasmid carriage (58 versus 29%) for oil field isolates than for isolates from the control site. The average number of plasmids per plasmid-carrying strain was 2.5 and 1.5 for oil field and control site strains, respectively. By contrast, Leahy et al. (86), in a study of bacteria isolated from sediments in the Campeche Bank region of the Gulf of Mexico, concluded that there was no clear association between plasmid frequency or multiplicity and proximity to an oil field, but, rather, a positive correlation with the depth of the site from which the sediment was sampled. The failure to observe a higher incidence of plasmid-bearing bacteria within the oil field was attributed to the relatively low degree of oil contamination in the region at the time of the study. Burton et al. (34) reported that 15% of the aerobic, heterotrophic bacteria isolated from the sediment of a river receiving domestic and industrial effluents carried plasmids, compared with 10% of the bacteria from an unpolluted area upstream. Ogunseitan et al. (99) observed a higher frequency (19.4%) of plasmid-bearing bacterial isolates from an aquifer with a history of aromatic hydrocarbon contamination than from two pristine aquifers (1.8 and 7.7%). Fredrickson et al. (57) found that bacterial isolates from the deeper layers (29 to 260 m) of terrestrial sediments exhibited a higher incidence of plasmids (31 to 39%) than those from the surface soil (14%) or the shallow aquifer (16%). They hypothesized that the large plasmids associated with bacteria from the deeper strata, some of which hybridized to a TOL plasmid probe, contained genes encoding aromatic compound catabolism. Schutt (119) observed a similar proportion of plasmid carriage (34%) among the bacterial isolates from a dystrophic lake containing high concentrations of humic compounds. To confirm the participation of plasmid DNA in the genetic changes of the microbial community during adaptation, further studies are necessary to identify the functions of plasmids associated with bacteria indigenous to hydrocarbon-containing environments. 