Similarly, in the metagenome data, the Oceanospirillales comprised >60% of both plume samples, compared with 5% in the uncontaminated sample in the metagenome data (Figure 2 and Supplementary Table S3). This observed bloom of Oceanospirillales corresponded with an increase in bacterial cell densities in the plume from 5.47±2.68 × 103 cells per ml in the uncontaminated sample to 1.44±0.47 × 105 cells per ml in the proximal plume and 2.68±0.48 × 105 cells per ml in the distal plume (see Hazen et al., 2010 (Figure 4a)). Figure 2. Figure 2 - Unfortunately we are unable to provide accessible alternative text for this. If you require assistance to access this image, please contact help@nature.com or the author Relative abundance of bacteria and archaea in the proximal and distal plume samples and in the uncontaminated sample collected from plume depth. (a) Relative OTU abundance of rarified 16S rRNA gene 454-pyrotag data. Universal primers for archaea and bacteria were used. Taxonomy was assigned using the Greengenes (DeSantis et al., 2006) 16S rRNA gene database. (b) Raw, unassembled metagenomic and metatranscriptomic reads were compared with the Greengenes (DeSantis et al., 2006) database. Less-abundant bacteria and archaea are grouped under the category ‘other.’ The complete list of bacteria and archaea observed in these analyses are presented in Supplementary Tables S2, S3 and S4. Full figure and legend (154K) Table 1 - Diversity metrics of rarified bacterial and archaeal 16S rRNA 454-pyrotag sequences. Table 1 - Diversity metrics of rarified bacterial and archaeal 16S rRNA 454-pyrotag sequences - Unfortunately we are unable to provide accessible alternative text for this. If you require assistance to access this image, please contact help@nature.com or the author Full table Recently, we used a GeoChip (He et al., 2010) functional gene microarray to determine which functional genes were prevalent in the plume and found several hydrocarbon degradation genes having a higher relative abundance in the plume (Lu et al., 2011). However, those data were not sufficient for determination of the biodegradation pathways or whether such pathways were actually expressed or attributed to a particular microorganism in the plume. Here we examined deep metagenome sequence data for genes and the pathways involved in hydrocarbon degradation. We found that the entire pathway for degradation of n-alkanes was represented and abundant in the metagenome data from the plume samples (Figure 3). Alkane oxidation is initiated by monooxygenases, yielding alcohols as intermediates, which are converted to aldehydes and fatty acids by alcohol and aldehyde dehydrogenases (Sabirova et al., 2006). In our study, we observed genes corresponding to alkane monooxygenases, a group of enzymes with broad substrate specificity. In addition, the nearly complete pathway for cyclohexane degradation (alkane monooxygenase→cyclohexanol dehydrogenase→cyclohexanone monooxygenase→→beta oxidation) (Sabirova et al., 2006) was observed and abundant in the metagenomes (Figure 3). We also found a specific alkane gene (alkane-1 monooxygenase), as also reported by Lu et al. (2011), that was more abundant in the plume than outside of the plume. However, in contrast to Lu et al. (2011), we found that genes involved in degradation of aromatic compounds were less abundant than those involved in alkane degradation (Figure 3; see Supplementary Figure S2 for Macondo crude oil constituents and Supplementary Table S1 for n-alkane, cyclohexane, methylcyclohexane, BTEX and PAH concentrations in the plume samples). For example, genes coding for ethylbenzene, toluene and PAH degradation were significantly (P<0.05) less abundant in both plume samples compared with the uncontaminated sample. The abundance of genes involved in alkane degradation compared with those involved in degradation of aromatic compounds in our data set is consistent with the ease of degradation of the respective hydrocarbons (Das and Chandran, 2011) and suggested that the plume was enriched with populations having the capacity for degradation of alkanes. Additional evidence for biodegradation of alkanes in the plume samples was presented in our previous study (Hazen et al., 2010) that reported oil half-lives in the plume of 1.2–6.1 days for C13–C26 n-alkanes. It should be noted that biodegradation of hydrocarbons in the plume was carried out without significant oxygen depletion (oxygen saturation averaged 59–67% inside and outside the plume, respectively) (Hazen et al., 2010). Figure 3. Figure 3 - Unfortunately we are unable to provide accessible alternative text for this. 