Despite the higher solubilisation of benzene in soil water in the presence of ethanol, this difference between the two situations (standard vs. amended-gasoline) tends to decrease with increasing soil water saturation; the lower the amounts of water, the higher the relative amounts of BTEX that are solubilised in soil water because of ethanol (Castro, 2007; Molson et al., 2002). As contaminants progress inside the soil, they undergo volatilisation, retention and biodegradation. Contamination residues were detected in ethanol-containing soils for a longer period than in gasoline-contaminated ones, which could be explained mainly by differences in contaminant bioavailability leading to different degradation rates. Volatilisation may contribute to the disappearance of contaminants; however, if it were the determining factor, residues would disappear faster from ethanol-contaminated soils, because of a slightly increased vapour pressure in amended gasoline. Also, if volatilisation was the only cause for the loss of contaminants, similar amounts of residues, or none, would have been detected in sterile and in non-sterile soils, in contrast with our studies. Volatilisation of gasoline from natural structured soil showed the role of soil water content in this process. Standard gasoline tends to volatilise more easily from soils with higher water content, as water does not allow contact or interaction between gasoline and soil particles. When gasoline is blended to ethanol, the solubilising effect of the latter on BTEX modifies water characteristics as it becomes laden with BTEX. Therefore, the remaining unsolubilised gasoline–ethanol mixture may volatilise more easily, as more BTEX are retained in soil water. An easier and faster volatilisation would also be expected for ethanol-blended gasoline because of a higher vapour pressure caused by ethanol. Ethanol addition to gasoline can increase its vapour pressure from 62 to 68.9 kPa depending on the ratio of the two components as well as on the amount of ethanol in the mixture (Hammel-Smith et al., 2002; Ulrich, 1999). As shown by Pumphrey et al. (2000), gasoline vapour pressure was initially increased by the addition of different alcohols, but it decreased when using higher alcohol proportions. For gasoline containing 20 to 25% ethanol v/v the observed increase in vapour pressure was around 7%. The maximum increase is observed for the 10% v/v mixture, therefore not relevant for Brazilian mixtures, which is substantiated by our results. In experiments with natural soil, loss of contaminants by volatilisation seems to happen very rapidly, taking place mostly during the first hours to the first days after contamination (according to the size of the soil sample), slightly higher from BTEX-contaminated soils. In our experiments, no significant difference (p = 0.125) was observed in BTEX volatilisation in the hours following contamination between systems with and without ethanol showing that a possible increase in vapour pressure was not relevant. Other studies with sandy soil and ethanol-blended gasoline have shown that volatilisation is responsible for more carbon removal than biodegradation of gasoline compounds in unsaturated soil, while biodegradation seemed to be the main mechanism involved in the disappearance of ethanol (Dakhel et al., 2003). Our results suggest that soil components other than sand may affect BTEX retention and thus further promote their biodegradation. A higher retention of BTEX in the soil matrix was observed in natural as well as in inert soil for ethanol-amended gasoline. In sterile dried natural soils, where no biodegradation occurred, BTEX were still detectable in soil after 33 days in slightly higher amounts in BTEX–ethanol -contaminated soil. Differences in BTEX amounts between BTEX-contaminated and BTEX–ethanol -contaminated soils were very close to significance (p = 0.051). The tank experiments with unsaturated inert porous medium showed different behaviours for contaminant infiltration and percolation when standard or ethanol-blended gasoline was introduced. Higher amounts of water in the effluents from amended gasoline percolation through soil indicate that the presence of ethanol leads to a more important displacement of soil residual water. In soils with low water content (around 5% weight) high amounts of introduced LNAPLs would remain as a continuous phase over water and could be easily expelled, while the water phase would be retained on soil particles. Hence, a single phase is observed in effluents, comprising mainly gasoline compounds with small quantities of water. Moreover, as these assays were conducted with inert soil, there was no interference of organic matter and other soil components with the draining processes of gasoline; actually, the lower the amounts of soil organic matter, the less the retention of contaminants by the soil matrix (Haydn et al., 1997). In similar experiments conducted with natural structured soil with water contents around 10%, the percolation of gasoline and of ethanol-blended gasoline through soil always resulted in single-phase effluents (data not shown). This shows the role of soil mineralogy and components, such as clays and organic matter among others, on the distribution and retention of water and contaminants, even for soils with low clay and organic matter contents such as in this study (Halmemies et al., 2003; Haydn et al., 1997). 