HS contain quinone moieties which Fe(III)-reducing microorganisms can use as electron acceptors for the oxidation of organic compounds (25−27). The hydroquinone moieties produced as the result of electron transfer to HS can abiotically reduce Fe(III) oxides, producing Fe(II) and regenerating oxidized HS that can again serve as an electron acceptor in the metabolism of Fe(III)-reducing microorgan isms (27). Thus, even at very low concentrations, HS or other extracellular quinones can significantly accelerate the rate of Fe(III) oxide reduction in aquifer sediments via this electron shuttling mechanism (28). There appears to have been little investigation of the potential for anaerobic MTBE degradation. Thermodynamic calculations suggest that anaerobic oxidation of MTBE is possible with each of the most prevalent electron acceptors known to support anaerobic respiration in sedimentary environments (Table 1). A recent EPA study indicates that MTBE may be removed from groundwater under methanogenic conditions (29). However, the few studies that have been carried out under controlled anaerobic conditions suggest that MTBE is only slowly degraded, if at all, in the absence of oxygen. For example, in anaerobic MTBE-contaminated aquifer sediments, ca. 3% of the added [14C]-MTBE was converted to 14CO2 in seven months (11). A similar study with aquatic sediments found no anaerobic oxidation of [14C]-MTBE (5). When freshwater sediments were amended with MTBE and incubated under anaerobic conditions, MTBE persisted in most of the sediments evaluated, with the exception of one bottle of sediment in which there was evidence for the conversion of some of the MTBE to tert-butyl alcohol (TBA), which was not further degraded (30, 31). In another study, MTBE persisted in most water-saturated soils, but was slowly degraded in one soil, amended with starch and nutrients, that was assumed to be methanogenic (32), but it was not clear that the loss of MTBE that was observed could be attributed to anaerobic processes because the soils were not incubated under strict anaerobic condi tions. In order to learn more about the potential for anaerobic degradation of MTBE, MTBE degradation was investigated in anaerobic sediments from a MTBE-contaminated aquifer in which rates of MTBE degradation were previously reported to be slow (11), as well as in aquatic sediments which previous studies have demonstrated can anaerobically degrade relatively recalcitrant hydrocarbon constituents such as benzene (33, 34). Materials and Methods Sediment Incubations. Aquifer sediments were collected from a previously described (11) petroleum-contaminated aquifer in Beaufort, SC. This is a military installation on Port Royal Island in coastal South Carolina which formerly had a leaking underground storage tank (with reformulated gasoline) that has since been excavated. The site has been well characterized by the U.S. Geological Survey (USGS) as part of the Toxic Substances Hydrology Program. The source area is still highly contaminated with aromatic hydrocarbons and MTBE and is anaerobic. Sediments from the Fe(III)-reducing zone were collected with a hand auger. Freshwater aquatic sediments were collected from the Potomac River at the previously described location (35) by using an Eckman dredge. These sediments had previously been found to have the potential for the anaerobic degrada tion of other hydrocarbon contaminants, including benzene (33, 34) All sediments were placed in sealed, anaerobic containers and shipped overnight to be processed. The sediments were homogenized in a N2-filled glovebag, and dispensed into the appropriate serum bottles or anaerobic pressure tubes, as described below. The vessels were sealed with thick butyl rubber stoppers. Upon removal from the glovebag the headspace of all the vessels was flushed with N2/CO2 (93:7) that had been passed through heated, reduced copper filings to remove any traces of oxygen. All sediments were incubated at 20 °C in the dark. The terminal electron accepting process (TEAP) in the sediment was determined by monitoring production of 14CO2 and 14CH4 from [2-14C]-acetate as previously described (14). Approximately 12 g of sediment was dispensed into two sets of triplicate anaerobic pressure tubes. One series of sediment incubations was amended with Na2MoO4 (1 mM) in order to inhibit sulfate reduction. For studies on degradation of MTBE and TBA, sediments (30 g) were incubated in 60-mL serum bottles, as previously described (22). 