Killed controls were heat-sterilized at 121 °C for one hour per day, for three consecutive days. All amendments were added anaerobically from anaerobic, sterile stock solutions. No more than 1 mL of liquid was added to any of the sediments. Headspace volume in these bottles was approximately 28 mL. Poorly crystalline Fe(III) oxide was synthesized as previously described (35) and added to provide 40−100 mmol/kg of sediment. Fe(III) chelated with nitrilotriacetic acid (NTA) and Fe(III) chelated with ethylene diamine tetraacetic acid (EDTA) were added to a final concentration of 10 mM. Anthraquinone-2,6-disulfonate (AQDS) and humic acids (Aldrich, St. Louis, MO) were added to final concentrations of ca. 100 μM and 0.15 g/kg of sediment, respectively. MTBE and TBA were added to provide a final concentra tion of ca. 50 mg/L and the concentrations of MTBE and TBA were monitored over time. Additional studies were conducted with the aquatic sediments in which [14C]-MTBE or [14C]-TBA was added to monitor the degradation products of MTBE and TBA. [U-14C]-MTBE (5.0 mCi/mmol; New England Nuclear, Boston, MA) or [U-14C]-TBA (5.0 mCi/mmol, Moravek Biochemicals, Inc., Brea, CA) were added to provide 0.5 μCi. The radiochemical purity of the tracers was 99%. Production of 14CO2 and 14CH4 were monitored over time. Analytical Techniques. 14CO2 and 14CH4 were measured with a gas chromatograph coupled to a gas proportional radiochromatography detector as previously described (14). In order to monitor degradation of MTBE and TBA, headspace samples were collected with a syringe and needle and were separated by gas chromatography on a HP-1 fuel oxygenates capillary column (Hewlett Packard, Wilmington, DE; 60 m length × 0.25 mm i.d.) connected to a flame ionization detector. Concentrations of HCl-extractable Fe(III) and Fe(II) in the sediments were determined with ferrozine as previously described (36). Results The potential for anaerobic MTBE degradation was first evaluated in the aquifer sediments. No [14C]-MTBE was available for these studies so MTBE degradation was monitored by measuring the loss of MTBE over time. There was no loss of MTBE over 275 days in sediments that received no amendments or in sediments amended with only with poorly crystalline Fe(III) oxide, NTA, Fe(III)-NTA, or Fe(III)-EDTA (data not shown). However, in one of the three bottles amended with HS and Fe(III), the MTBE was depleted below the detection limit (1 mg/L) during this time. When MTBE (ca. 50 mg/L) was added back to the sediments, it was consumed without a lag (Figure 1). MTBE was added back with repeated consumption of the MTBE until after 180 days when MTBE consumption stopped. By this time the sedi ments were very dark compared to the reddish-brown color when the Fe(III) was first added, suggesting that most of the Fe(III) had been reduced. When more Fe(III) oxide and MTBE were added to the sediment degradation eventually resumed (Figure 1). figure Figure 1 Anaerobic loss of MTBE in one of three replicate samples of an aquifer sediment enrichment after being adapted for 275 days in the presence of MTBE and amended with Fe(III) oxide and humic substances. 