The fact that those sequences have the highly conserved residues suggests that they are novel dioxygenase genes. Clustering and distribution of the obtained sequences Those 2604 valid sequences with conserved positions were clustered together with reference sequences by complete linkage clustering on the basis of amino-acid sequences. The numbers of operational taxonomical units (OTUs) of valid sequences at each distance level are shown in Figure 2. A total of 479 and 234 unique sequences were obtained from BPHD-f3 and BPHD-r1, respectively (Figure 2). As pyrosequencing produces a large data set, it is necessary to cluster the sequences to reduce the number for analysis. We selected 0.6 distance as a cutoff (Figure 2) to obtain 56 and 20 clusters for BPHD-f3 and BPHD-r1, respectively, numbers manageable for analysis and interpretation. Figure 3 shows the distance to the closest reference sequence(s) for each sequence in each cluster and the number of sequences in that cluster. The clusters are (i) newly obtained clusters composed of only our valid sequences (closed symbols in Figure 3) and earlier known clusters composed of (ii) both our valid sequences and reference sequences (open symbols in Figure 3), and (iii) only reference sequences. The numbers of clusters in each category are as follows: for (i), (ii) and (iii): 22, 11 and 23, respectively; and 3, 4 and 13 for BPHD-f3 and BPHD-r1, respectively. Fifty-nine percent of sequences from BPHD-f3 are in the largest four clusters, which were type (i). The rest of the sequences are distributed into small clusters, which were composed of <6% (120 sequences) of the total valid sequences. The largest type (ii) cluster from BPHD-f3 is composed of 35 sequences (1.8%). The cluster includes toluene/biphenyl dioxygenase genes such as bphA1 from B. xenovorans LB400 (AAB63425) and bphAa from Rhodococcus sp. RHA1 (ABG99107) is the second largest type (ii) cluster with 18 sequences (0.9%). Three sequences from BPHD-f3 had a similarity value of 1 to the reference sequences. For BPHD-r1 sequences, 85% of valid sequences were in the largest two clusters and the rest were in small clusters, which have <8% (48 sequences) of the total valid sequences. The largest cluster has 288 sequences (48%) and was type (ii). The second largest cluster is type (i) and has 223 sequences (37%). None of the sequences from BPHD-r1 had a similarity value of 1 to the reference sequences. The farthest distance to reference sequences was 0.59 and most sequences in novel clusters have distances between 0.45–0.6 to reference sequences (Figure 3). Cluster distribution and frequency of each unique sequence for clusters with >200 sequences are shown in Supplementary Figure S2. The accession numbers of reference sequences in each cluster are shown in Supplementary Table S1. Discussion The particular region amplified, the degree of coverage of the target gene family and the specificity of primer sets are critical for designing PCR primer sets to assess gene populations in a community. For pyrosequencing, the length of the PCR product must not be too long or it will reduce emulsion PCR efficiency (Margulies et al., 2005). We selected the particular 524 bp region because it provided suitably conserved primer sites, was of suitable length and covered a region known to be functionally important (confers substrate specificity). Our primer set had 48- and 16-fold degeneracy for BPHD-f3 and BPHD-r1, respectively, to obtain a good coverage of target genes. As increasing degeneracy caused less specificity of the primer set, the degeneracy used here was optimal for maximizing coverage without sacrificing specificity. After we removed low-quality sequences (likely because of sequencing error and/or nondioxygenase sequences) and those without conserved positions, 80% and 72% of raw sequences remained as valid sequences for BPHD-f3 and BPHD-r1, respectively. These high ratios indicate enough primer specificity for further analysis. 