The high sensitivity of PLFA-SIP helps realize this goal, but for RNA-SIP and DNA-SIP, the synthesis of labelled nucleic acid must be sufficient for the separation and detection of labelled molecules from the abundant background of unlabelled material (reviewed by Neufeld et al, 2007a). Recent developments have increased the sensitivity of the nucleic acid-based SIP technique. In particular, fractionation of cesium chloride or cesium trifluoroacetate gradients (Lueders et al, 2004) enables the objective recovery of nucleic acids and for DNA-SIP, circumvents the visualization of large quantities of unlabelled and labelled DNA with ethidium bromide (Radajewski et al, 2000). Further, purification of low amounts of DNA from gradient fractions is inefficient, but this shortcoming has been overcome by the addition of labelled archaeal DNA (Gallagher et al, 2005) or glycogen (Neufeld et al, 2007b) as carriers for precipitation. Metagenomic analysis of labelled DNA is one desired goal of current DNA-SIP studies (Dumont et al, 2006). But herein lies the dilemma: incubate samples with near in situ conditions and generate low nanogram yields of labelled DNA or incubate samples with unrealistic substrate concentrations and incubation times, generating microgram yields of labelled DNA for direct cloning? For some studies, so little is known about the organisms and genes involved in metabolizing a particular substrate that any relevant genetic information is a significant discovery; incubation conditions are less important. However, a likely outcome is that with excessive substrate and incubation times, characterized organisms will be similar to those previously identified with cultivation-based approaches. One strong possibility for future innovation is the ability to couple low substrate incubations, phi29-based whole-genome amplification of labelled DNA and metagenomics analysis. The major hurdle to overcome will involve balancing the cloning of large DNA fragments with the associated limitation of chimeric artefacts that are generated by cloning genome-amplified DNA (Zhang et al, 2006). The traditional SIP technique has been tweaked and modified to enable a suite of novel applications and experiments. One recent advance has involved improvements to the labelling and detection of DNA using 15N-labelled substrates (Cadisch et al, 2005). The resolution of labelled and unlabelled DNA (or RNA) following 15N incorporation is less than that for 13C incorporation (Cupples et al, 2006), reflecting the differential abundance of nitrogen and carbon in DNA, respectively. Buckley et al (2007b) have demonstrated a unique approach to disentangle the parallel effects of G+C content and isotopic enrichment on isopycnic separation of DNA. Through a combination of two ultracentrifugation steps and the addition of an intercalating compound to the second ultracentrifugation, 15N-labelled DNA is effectively separated from high G+C unlabelled DNA. The utility of such an approach was demonstrated by the discovery of uncultured and putatively novel nitrogen-fixing bacteria in the Alphaproteobacteria (Rhodoplanes), Betaproteobacteria and Actinobacteria (Buckley et al, 2007a). Expanding on the stable isotopes molecules available for nucleic acid-based SIP, Schwartz (2007) recently demonstrated the utility of stable oxygen (18O) for DNA-SIP. DNA and RNA may be labelled efficiently with 18O because of the five oxygen atoms per nucleotide in the sugar backbone of DNA, in addition to the two neutrons offered by each incorporated molecule of stable oxygen. Incubating Escherichia coli cultures or soil samples with H218O yielded DNA from actively growing cells that was sufficiently labelled to separate 18O-containing DNA from a background of 18O-DNA. Such an approach offers a substrate-independent ability to characterize active community members and will be particularly helpful in examining the impact of moisture content on soil microbial communities (Schwartz, 2007). An often-cited disadvantage of SIP-based studies is that biomarkers from organisms that can feed on metabolic degradation products of other organisms may become labelled during an SIP incubation. Cross-feeding is a lingering explanation for the puzzling observation of labelled DNA possessing an Acidobacteria 16S ribosomal RNA (rRNA) gene sequence after a soil methanol incubation in the original DNA-SIP publication (Radajewski et al, 2000). Regardless of this, what has been a common criticism, that is, 'cross-feeding' can now be turned into an advantage to look at the flow of carbon through ecosystems. For several SIP experiments, studying trophic networks was performed by labelling macroorganisms that provide nutrients for a natural microbial community (Cadisch et al, 2005; Lu and Conrad, 2005; Rangel-Castro et al, 2005) or by labelling microbial cells. Lueders et al (2006) recently conducted a cross-feeding study by supplementing indigenous soil microbial communities with an excess of 13C-labelled E. coli cells. An important consideration was that the soil communities were monitored over time, revealing a complex trophic network, including the labelling of rRNA gene sequences associated with gliding micropredators. Near-future SIP developments will likely include its combination with phylochips for highly parallel analyses of the community composition represented by the heavy DNA or rRNA (Wagner et al, 2007) and the long-awaited advent of mRNA-SIP and polypeptide-SIP. The current DNA-SIP protocol (Neufeld et al, 2007b) does not directly implicate the expression of genes that are associated with labelled DNA. The RNA-SIP protocol (Whiteley et al, 2007) focusses on 16S rRNA and does not capture mRNA. 