There is evidence that the initial anaerobic reaction of ethylbenzene in SRB differs completely from the reaction in denitrifiers and is analogous to toluene activation. In a sulphate-reducing enrichment culture utilising ethylbenzene, (1-phenylethyl) succinate was detected indicating ethylbenzene addition to fumarate (Fig. 6d). Furthermore, the sulphate-reducing strain isolated with ethylbenzene is unable to oxidize 1-phenylethanol and acetophenone (O Kniemeyer, F Widdel, unpublished results), which are intermediates and growth substrates in ethylbenzene-degrading denitrifiers. In the ‘low-potential’ metabolism of SRB, activation via a reductively generated radical (see above) is apparently ‘easier’ to achieve than dehydrogenation, which has a relatively high redox potential (1-phenylethanol/ethylbenzene, E0′≈+0.03V; estimated by analogy with thermodynamic data of other alcohols/hydrocarbons). Azoarcus strain PbN1 utilizes n-propylbenzene in addition to ethylbenzene. The pathway of propylbenzene oxidation is assumed to proceed in analogy to that of ethylbenzene ( Fig. 6e) 5. ; 62. and might even involve the same enzymes for activation and subsequent steps (O Kniemeyer, J Heider, personal communication). Naphthalene, phenanthrene and 2-methylnaphthalene Hints on anaerobic naphthalene degradation originally came from studies with sediment communities under conditions of sulphate reduction 5.; 92. ; 93.. Complete degradation of naphthalene was demonstrated by quantitative growth experiments with a novel type of SRB. Experiments with radiolabelled substrate revealed naphthalene oxidation by pure cultures of denitrifying bacteria [95]. Identification of 2-naphthoic acid as a metabolite in sulphate-reducing cultures enriched with naphthalene suggested an initial activation via carboxylation to 2-naphthoate 93. ; 96. (Fig. 6f). This finding is in agreement with the observation that the sulphate-reducing isolate can utilize 2-naphthoate but not 1-naphthoate. The identification of other metabolites in a sulphate-reducing enrichment culture indicated the further metabolism of 2-naphthoate (presumably as activated acid) via subsequent reduction of the two rings to yield decalin-2-carboxylate (or an activated form). Degradation of the tricyclic aromatic hydrocarbon phenanthrene under anoxic conditions was demonstrated in sediment cultures with 14C-labelled substrate 92. ; 93.. Mass spectrometric analysis indicated the formation of a phenanthrene carboxylate isomer as the initial product, again suggesting substrate carboxylation [93]. Alkylnaphthalenes (and higher polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons with alkyl groups) occur in great structural variety in crude oil [3], but little is known about their degradation. In comparative enrichment studies with sulphate and 1- and 2-methylnaphthalene, only the latter compound led to bacterial growth and sulphide production (F Widdel, unpublished results). Alkylnaphthalenes are expected to undergo activation more easily than naphthalene (as alkylbenzenes are easier to activate than benzene) and to follow initial reactions comparable to those of alkylbenzenes. Indeed, the identification of naphthyl-2-methylsuccinic acid as a metabolite in a sulphate-reducing enrichment culture grown on 2-methylnaphthalene (Fig. 6c) supports an activation mechanism analogous to that of toluene. Environmental and other aspects of anaerobic hydrocarbon degradation Anaerobic bioremediation Many studies of the anaerobic biodegradation of the hydrocarbons in natural habitats, microcosms and enrichment cultures (e.g., 52.; 53.; 54.; 55.; 56.; 57.; 60.; 63.; 86.; 92. ;) were initiated to determine whether or not bioremediation processes are possible in deep, anoxic petroleum-contaminated or fuel-contaminated sediments and aquifers. A basic idea for augmented bioremediation is to make electron acceptors in injected water available at concentrations higher than that of dissolved oxygen from air. The concentration of O2 in air-saturated water (8.6mg/L at 25°C) has the capacity to oxidize, for instance, no more than 2.8mg toluene/L. Nitrate and sulphate are much more soluble. For example, even gypsum, a form of sulphate with low solubility, with a saturation concentration corresponding to around 2g CaSO4/L would allow the anaerobic oxidation of 300 mg toluene/L. Aromatic hydrocarbons are of particular concern because of their toxic effects, including carcinogenic properties in the case of benzene [100]. There is no doubt that the degradation of petroleum and refined products is much faster under oxic than anoxic conditions, as can be easily demonstrated in comparative enrichment cultures with and without air. 