Furthermore, aerobic microorganisms seem to degrade a wider range of hydrocarbon compounds than anaerobic microorganisms. Still, an argument in support of the development of anaerobic bioremediation procedures is the observation that benzene, toluene, xylenes and ethylbenzene are degradable without oxygen; these are the most water-soluble aromatic hydrocarbons (saturation concentrations at 25°C are 1800, 580, around 200 and 125mg/L, respectively) and spread most easily. Alkanes are usually regarded to have no or little toxicity, apart from volatile alkanes at high concentrations which have mainly a narcotic effect. Nevertheless, the degradation of alkanes as a highly hydrophobic background that adsorbs aromatic hydrocarbons may increase bioavailability of the latter for microbial degradation. The extent of the degradation of hydrocarbons from oil and the groups of microorganisms involved were studied in enrichment cultures with sulphate 46. ; 101. or nitrate as electron acceptors. If crude oil is present in growth-limiting amounts, the portion that can be oxidized under anoxic conditions can be estimated from the amount of reduced electron acceptor (e.g., sulphate or nitrate). For example, in sulphate-reducing and denitrifying cultures, the consumption of n-alkanes and alkylbenzenes together amounted to ∼12 or 3%, respectively, of the crude oil 46. ;. Further hydrocarbons not degraded in these enrichment cultures, but shown to be degradable in other cultures or habitats, are trimethylbenzene isomers [102], naphthalene, 2-methylnaphthalene (see above) and pristane (2,6,10,14-tetramethylpentadecane) [103]. With these capabilities, and possibly further as yet unknown capacities, a higher percentage of crude oil and gasoline may be degraded without oxygen, in particular if incubation times are longer than a couple of months as used for enrichment cultures. For monitoring the extent of anaerobic biodegradation, not only chemical hydrocarbon analysis, but also the identification of polar metabolite; 104. ; and isotope fractionation studie; ; may be valuable tools. Anaerobic bacterial hydrocarbon oxidation causes significant 13C-enrichment in the residual part of the organic substrate. Aspects from biogeochemistry and oil field microbiology The study of anaerobic hydrocarbon degradation also has implications for our understanding of biogeochemical processes in marine sediments and petroleum reservoirs. Methane is an important compound in the global carbon cycle and a trace gas that contributes to atmospheric photochemical reactions and influences the heat budget of our biosphere. Anaerobic oxidation of methane in marine sediments is a globally relevant sink without which the methane input into our atmosphere would be 5–20% higher [31]. Knowledge of the growth properties of anaerobic methane-oxidizing communities and their control by biotic and abiotic factors (e.g., bioturbation, temperature, redox conditions, concentrations of reactants and products) are essential to predict how the consumption of methane is affected by natural or anthropogenic environmental changes. The utilization of non-methane hydrocarbons by SRB has been regarded as a source of sulphide and sulphur (formed by incomplete oxidation with oxygen) during maturation of petroleum reservoirs [107]. This assumption, as well as that of an anaerobic alteration of the petroleum composition , has been supported by the enrichment and isolation of SRB able to grow by utilising hydrocarbons directly from crude oil 46. ; 101.. The utilisation of oil hydrocarbons for bacterial sulphate reduction may also significantly contribute to the undesirable production of hydrogen sulphide in oil production [101]. Hydrogen sulphide is toxic, stimulates corrosion of steel, diminishes the value of oil and gas by increasing the sulphur content, and forms FeS precipitates that impede oil-water separation and in addition reduce the permeability of reservoir rocks if water is injected for oil extraction. Knowledge of the bacteria involved is a prerequisite for the development of countermeasures. The anaerobic degradability of several hydrocarbons from crude oil does not necessarily contradict their obvious preservation in reservoirs. First, oil in reservoirs is trapped in the pores of rocks, such that molecular diffusion into aqueous surroundings where bacteria can, in principle, develop is very limited. Second, many anaerobic bacteria formerly buried with sediments may have died due to substrate limitations or high temperature during catagenesis; also extremely high salt concentrations may limit the diversity of bacteria that can develop in stratal waters. On the other hand, there are assumptions that anaerobic bacteria deposited with the original sediments have survived millions of years; such survival appears unlikely without a slow, more or less constant supply of substrates by migration processes over geological periods [101]. In any case, suitable growth conditions for hydrocarbon-degrading anaerobes are likely to be established by the mobilization of oil upon water injection, the introduction of sulphate (especially if seawater is injected), and the decrease of temperature and salinity. The repeatedly observed increase in sulphate reduction after the onset of oil production may reflect the gradual spreading and growth of SRB. Conclusions The study of the anaerobic degradation of hydrocarbons has brought to light a variety of novel anaerobic bacteria and degradative capacities (Fig. 4, Fig. 6). 