PLFA data from the methanogenic site were omitted due to heavy petroleum contamination at this site that appeared to carry over into the PLFA assays. Hierarchical cluster analysis of the sediment PLFA profiles (Fig. 1) indicated that microbial community composition at the uncontaminated site was distinct from that at sites where Fe(III) reduction was the dominant TEAP. PLFA profiles from the Fe(III)-reducing sites were similar and exhibited a higher diversity of PLFA than that observed at the uncontaminated site. There were, however, substantial differences between the PLFA profiles extracted from each Fe(III)reducing site. The distribution of Geobacter species in the sediments was estimated by evaluating the five PLFAs that are most abundant in known Geobacter species (37a), with the exclusion of the ubiquitous saturated PLFAs 16:0 and 18:0. This analysis indicated that the concentration of Geobacter indicative PLFAs was highest at site IR-3, lower at sites IR-2 and IR-1, and lowest at the uncontaminated site (Fig. 2). However, these results must be viewed with caution because the PLFAs used in this analysis are not unique to Geobacter spp. but are also present in other gram-negative bacteria (45). Phylogenetic diversity of sediment microbial community. PCR-DGGE analysis of triplicate sediment samples indicated FIG. 2. Distribution of Geobacteraceae-indicative PLFA functional groups at sites IR-1, IR-2, and IR-3 and the uncontaminated site. that DGGE patterns from each site were consistent and reproducible (Fig. 3). The DGGE patterns were clearly resolved with fewer than 25 bands per lane (Fig. 3 and 4). The use of several different ranges of denaturant gradients improved the DGGE analysis and provided more-detailed focus on separate segments of the community with each different gradient (Fig. 4). Detailed PCR-DGGE and sequence analysis was focused on site IR-3, the most active site of anaerobic benzene degradation (4), and the uncontaminated site. There were marked differences in the DGGE profiles of bacterial 16S rDNA from the two sites (Fig. 4). The diversity of dominant bacteria appeared to be higher at site IR-3, as was evident from the fact that, regardless of the denaturant gradient, far more bands were present in DGGE profiles from site IR-3 than at the uncontaminated site. While the two sites shared several 16S rDNA fragments that were either identical or extremely closely related (Fig. 4), the majority of sequences were unique to each site. One of the most conspicuous differences between these sites was band Geo-83, which was the predominant band at site IR-3 and was not detected at the uncontaminated site. Comparative sequence analysis placed Geo-83 within the Geobacter cluster, with its closest relative being G. chapellei (Fig. 5). 