Strain X7B was grown in MAM containing 0.5 mM BTH as the sole sulfur source to the end of the exponential growth phase, and the culture broth was extracted with ethyl acetate. GC-MS analysis revealed several main peaks. Besides the main solvent peaks detected after about 3 min, the other three peaks were further analyzed by use of their mass spectra to deduce the structures which were not detected in the extracts prepared from cells grown with sulfate instead of BTH. Mass spectral data are shown in Fig. 1. These mass spectral data agreed with those of o-hydroxystyrene, BTH, and benzo(c)(1, 2)oxathiin S,S-dioxide (31). Degradation of various organic sulfur compounds by M. goodii X7B.Petroleum-based fuel oils, such as gasoline and diesel oil, contain enormous numbers of organic sulfur compounds, including thiophenes, BTHs, and DBTs. The capability of strain X7B to use organic sulfur compounds other than DBT as a sole sulfur source was investigated. M. goodii X7B was cultivated in MAM containing various sulfur sources at a concentration of 0.5 mM at 45°C. As shown in Table 1, this strain grew well on dimethyl sulfoxide, 4,6-dimethyl-DBT, DBT sulfone, DBT, BTH, 5-methyl-BTH, 2-thiopheneacetic acid, and 2-thiophene carboxylic acid for 24 h. 4-Methyl-DBT propylmercaptan also supported growth, but only after incubation for 48 h; 3,3′-thiodipropionic acid was also used as a sole sulfur source for the growth of X7B, and it was shown that X7B could grow well after 3 days, which may have been caused by the toxic effect of the sulfur compounds (12) used in the medium. The reduction of these sulfur compounds was also calculated, and most of them were degraded by the growing cells of strain X7B. Therefore, M. goodii X7B possesses a broad substrate range, suggesting its potential use for fuel desulfurization. Without glucose in the medium, strain X7B could not grow on any of the compounds listed in Table 1 as a sole sulfur source. Biodesulfurization of gasoline in M. goodii X7B immobilized-cell system.The feasibility of gasoline desulfurization was investigated by the use of DSRG227. GC-FID and GC-AED analyses were used to qualitatively evaluate the effects of M. goodii X7B treatment on the hydrocarbon and sulfur contents, respectively, of the gasoline. The GC-AED chromatograms of gasoline samples from the immobilized-cell reaction system revealed an extensive depletion of sulfur compounds across the entire boiling range of the oil (Fig. 2). The GC-FID chromatograms of gasoline samples (Fig. 3) from the reaction system and of untreated gasoline showed that hydrocarbon components with lower boiling points decreased slightly, while no visible changes in other hydrocarbon components were detected. The total sulfur content of the gasoline after treatment with immobilized cells of M. goodii X7B was 71 ppm, corresponding to a reduction of 69%. When beads of immobilized cells prepared from cell suspension cultures grown in the presence of Na2SO4 and noncell beads were used for the desulfurization reaction, no decrease in the sulfur content of the gasoline was detected (Table 2). After the desulfurization reaction, immobilized cells were collected and washed once with 0.85% NaCl. Ten milliliters of gasoline was then brought into contact with an immobilized-cell suspension, as described in Materials and Methods, for 24 h at 40°C. The longevity of the immobilized cells was evaluated from the residual desulfurization activity as a fraction of the initial activity. The residual activity was 82% for strain X7B. When immobilized M. goodii X7B cells were incubated at 40°C with DSRG275 in a reaction mixture containing 10% (vol/vol) oil for 24 h, the sulfur content of the gasoline decreased from 275 to 121 ppm. After a 24-h reaction, the desulfurization reaction was repeated by exchanging the used immobilized cells for fresh ones. The sulfur content of DSRG275 decreased from 275 to 54 ppm through two consecutive reactions, corresponding to a reduction of 81%. The BTH desulfurization pathways of Gordonia sp. 