A The results showed that different components of the hydrocarbons had different degrees of degradability; for example, the aliphatic hydrocarbons and the aromatics may have been readily degraded but the resins and asphaltenes are inherently recalcitrant (Atlas 1984). The heterotrophic bacteria, TPH degraders, and PAH degraders were deficient in the contaminated soil before bioremediation (Table 3). It was reported that, when the population of indigenous microorganisms capable of degrading the target contaminant is less than 105 colony-forming units (cfu) g−1 of soil, bioremediation will not occur at a significant rate (Hinchee et al. A 1995). In fact, the indigenous bacteria capable of degrading hydrocarbons are ubiquitous. A However, the environmental conditions in the oily sludge-contaminated soil negatively affected the growth of those bacteria. A It was reported that petroleum-contaminated soil with poultry may promote growth of the indigenous degraders in it (Rahman et al. A 2002). In this experiment an aliquot (5%) of manure was added to the treated plot and it can be seen that the populations of heterotrophic bacteria, TPH degraders, and PAH degraders in the treatment plot soil were one to two orders of magnitude higher than in the control after addition of manure to soil, and the populations of these microorganisms were also significantly higher (P < 0.05) than that in the control at the end of the experiment (360 days), indicating that amendment with manure had increased and stimulated TPH and PAH degraders in the soil. A Previous study showed pig dung contains 1.7 × 106 cfu g−1 crude oil-degrading bacteria (Bello 2007). So the possible reason was that manure itself contains a diverse range of microorganisms in addition to being a nutrient source. A Wuensche et al. (1995) demonstrated that substrate utilization patterns as recorded with the BIOLOG system are suitable for rapidly assessing the dynamics of autochthonous soil communities and evaluating their biodegradative potential. A AWCD and diversity index were analyzed using BIOLOG data to detect differences among treatments in the experiment. A The activity of soil microbial communities evaluated by AWCD in the treated soil markedly increased (P < 0.05) compared with that of the control plot after 360 days remediation (Fig. A 1). AWCD was an important indicator, reflecting sole carbon source utilization ability. A This indicates that the addition of manure has an important influence on the microbial activity. A The absorbance of each well in the BIOLOG plates at 72 h was used to calculate diversity indices of the microbial community in the oily sludge in different plots. A The values of McIntosh index, Shannon index, and richness are shown in Table 4. A Statistical analyses using ANOVA also showed that there were significant differences between treated and control plots (P < 0.05) for microbial community diversity indexes after bioremediation. A The Shannon index (H′) provides information about the distribution of carbon source utilization by microbial communities (Bronwyn et al. A 1997). While richness index considers only the number of carbon sources utilized in GN plates, the McIntosh index provides information on species richness based on number of species and their abundances (Norhayati et al. A 2002). Thus, it can be concluded that, not only did TPH markedly decrease, but also microbial activity, species, and diversity of the soil microorganism community increased after the experiment in the treated plots. A It must be emphasized that CLPP is not a culture-independent method, but rather is biased towards fast-growing, easily cultivable species (Smalla et al. A 1998). Thus, CLPP should not be seen as a standalone method, but can be highly complementary to other approaches (e.g., classical and molecular) in the polyphasic analysis of microbial communities. 