A It is therefore urgent to devise effective methods to treat the sludge-contaminated soil. A In the present study, in situ biostimulation through adding manure was used to reclaim the oily sludge-contaminated soil. Site selection and experimental design An in situ bioremediation study on an oily sludge-contaminated soil (30 m2) was conducted from May 2004 to May 2005 at the Shengli oilfield, Shandong Province, northern China (average annual rainfall of 533 mm, mean temperature of −4.1°C in January and +24.7°C in July). The site was separated into two plots, designated treated and control plots. A The two plots were subdivided into three equal subplots and adjacent plots were separated by a 30-cm gap. A Aliquot (5%) of manure containing a small quantity of rice straw, collected fresh from a nearby pigsty, was added to the treated plot while the other plot was maintained as a control. A The soils in both plots were thoroughly tilled and watered at required intervals to maintain proper aeration and water supply. Soil samples were taken at 0 days (initiation of experiment) and 360 days (end of treatment) from all subplots. A Five samples were taken randomly from every subplot (0-30 cm depth) and combined to give three composite samples from treated and control plots. A The composite samples were stored at 4°C for a maximum of 7 days before analysis. Physicochemical properties of soil samples at 0 and 360 days from each subplot were characterized. A Air-dried and pulverized soil samples were analyzed for organic matter, water-holding capacity (WHC), pH, hydrolyzable nitrogen, and available phosphorus and potassium using standard methods (Lu 1999). Aliquots (10 g) of subsamples of air-dried and pulverized soil were mixed with equal volume of anhydrous Na2SO4. A Then the mixtures underwent Soxhlet extraction with dichloromethane (DCM) for 24 h. A The extract was then concentrated to dryness with a rotary evaporator. A The flask was reweighed to determine the total petroleum hydrocarbon (TPH) content. A A glass column (20 mm internal diameter, 300 mm long) was filled with 3 g activated silica gel and 2 g Al2O3 suspended in n-hexane. A TPH (0.05 g) was dissolved in 30 ml n-hexane for 12 h and then filtered with a funnel stuffed with absorbent cotton. A The filtrate was evaporated to 3–5 ml at 40°C and then loaded at the top of the column. A The column was then successively eluted with 30 ml n-hexane, 20 ml chloroform-n-hexane (1:1), 10 ml DCM, and 10 ml of ethanol sequentially. A The fractions eluted with the solvents n-hexane and chloroform-n-hexane are referred to as alkanes and aromatics, respectively. A The fraction eluted with 10 ml DCM and 10 ml ethanol represents resins. A Finally, the funnel was eluted with chloroform and this fraction was comprised of asphaltenes. A The solvent present in each of these fractions was evaporated and the residual oil was determined by gravimetric measurement. Microbial counts and community-level physiological profiling analysis The heterotrophic bacteria were enumerated on nutrient agar plates. A TPH degraders and polyaromatic hydrocarbon (PAH) degraders were enumerated by the most probable number (MPN) technique (Wrenn and Venosa 1996). The community-level physiological profiling (CLPP) of the soil microbial communities was analyzed with Gram-negative (GN) microplates (BIOLOG Inc.). Aliquots of 10−3 dilutions were used to inoculate GN plates (150 μl per well) and incubated at 30°C. A The plates were read every 12 h (OD590) over 132 h using a BIOLOG automated plate reader. A All wells were blanked to the control well A1. 