There are no universal TPH cleanup standards for soils contaminated with crude oils (Salanitro et al. A 1997). Some guidelines were developed mainly for oil concentration, but petroleum contains hundreds of individual compounds with varying toxicity, mutagenicity, and carcinogenicity. A Ecotoxicity bioassays should therefore be used as supplementary tools for monitoring treatment effects (Grazyna et al. A 2005). The toxicity of the oily sludge-contaminated soil is mostly caused by the organic compounds in it. A It is known that these materials have very low aqueous solubility. A Thus the solvent DCM can extract the organic compounds, even those strongly adsorbed, for toxicity tests. A However, DCM itself is highly toxic to the bioindicator P. A phosphoreum T3. A DMSO has low toxicity to the bacterium but the solubility of hydrocarbons in DMSO is lower than in DCM. A A solvent exchange procedure therefore had to be performed with DCM/DMSO. A In this experiment, the toxicity of the soil was measured in the different treatments before and after bioremediation. A A sharp increase in the EC50 of the soil after 360 days bioremediation was observed in both treated and control plots (Fig. A 2); the EC50 of the treated plots was the highest, which indicates that bioremediation reduced the toxicity of the compounds in the soil. A Bioremediation is an environmentally friendly and relatively cost-effective alternative to conventional physicochemical soil treatment techniques. A In this study the indigenous hydrocarbon degraders, and hydrolyzable nitrogen and phosphorus were deficient and inadequate to stimulate degradation of the oily sludge. A Through addition of manure, the nutrient elements of the treated plot increased significantly compared with that of the control. A After about 1 year of bioremediation, TPH in the treated plot had decreased by 58.2%, compared with 15.6% in the control plot, with a marked increase in the WHC of the soil. A Biotoxicity, microbial activity, and diversity of soil microorganisms were also studied. A The experiments showed that the treated soil was less toxic and microbial activity and diversity increased compared with the control. A Although there were marked decreases in TPH and distinct improvements in the physicochemical properties and microbial activity of the soil after bioremediation, the TPH content in the soil was still as high as 101 g kg−1 in treated plots and further remediation (such as phytoremediation) is required. 