The enrichment of several genes (xylE, nahAcd, todC1C2BA, tmoABCDE, alkB) that encode enzymes responsible for key steps in the degradation of hydrocarbons, and one gene specific to rRNA group I of the genus Pseudomonas, was studied in DNA extracted from a fuel oil–contaminated field site, and in laboratory microcosms (with the exception of alkB). Toluene, ethylbenzene, xylene, and naphthalene concentrations were related to the extent of hybridization of the genes in the field studies. Significant differences were observed in the extent of hybridization of some of the genes between contaminated and noncontaminated samples. In the microcosm studies, gasoline at rates ranging from 0.5 mg to 125 mg gasoline/g of soil as applied to soils, and the changes in hybridization intensity of these genes monitored with time. The lower threshold of gene enrichment of these genes in response to gasoline addition was below 0.5 mg/g soil. Small increases were observed at the 0.5-mg exposure level, but hybridization intensity quickly decreased to levels below detection 6–8 days after addition of the gasoline. A dose-response effect was observed from treatments with gasoline concentrations ranging from 0.5 to 35 mg/g soil. Inhibition by toxic components in gasoline was observed at 75 and 125 mg/g soil levels. Hybridization of the Pseudomonas group 1 probe to field DNA was not significantly enriched in the contaminated field site, although these sequences were enriched in the microcosm studies. Among the genes tested, xylE was the most sensitive indicator of low levels of fuel oil contamination. Contamination of soils with petroleum products from leaking underground storage tanks (LUSTs) is of concern at many sites across the United States, and this contamination may significantly affect the structure and functions of the surrounding soil microbial communities. Petroleum products such as gasoline and diesel fuel contain a variety of components, some of which are highly toxic to microorganisms and others of which may be used as sources of carbon and energy by bacteria [2, 15, 19]. Microbial communities typically adapt to contaminants such as petroleum products by enrichment of those microorganisms that are either resistant to the toxic effects of the contaminant, or capable of utilizing the contaminant as a nutrient source [2]. An understanding of the adaptation of microbial communities to exposure to contaminants would be useful in developing and evaluating biological indicators of stress experienced by those communities. Such indicators would be useful for a variety of applications, including identification of levels of a contaminant required to affect a community, and the rapid identification of soils that have been affected by exposure to the contaminant. In addition, such an indicator may be useful in assessing the content of remediation of contaminated soils. Increases in the total numbers of hydrocarbon-utilizing microorganisms and of their relative proportions within microbial communities are commonly observed in microbial communities that have been exposed to petroleum contaminations [13, 14, 20, 29]. The abundance of hydrocarbon utilizers and the ratios of their numbers to total heterotrophs have been considered to be useful indicators of hydrocarbon contamination [2], although relatively few (possibly less than 1%) soil bacteria are readily cultivable [32, 33]. Culture-based indices such as these may be inefficient and biased. An alternative approach to culture-based enumeration of hydrocarbon utilizers is the application of gene probe technology to measure concentrations of genes that encode enzymes involved in the degradation of hydrocarbons within total community DNA [9, 25]. Although hydrocarbon degraders may be common in soils, background concentrations of genes coding for the degradation of a specific compound would be expected to be low relative to concentrations in soils that have been subject to fuel oil contamination [17, 24, 25]. Comparing the relative concentrations of genes specific to degradation of the contaminant within total community DNA extracted from exposed and unexposed communities may provide a sensitive biological indicator of microbial community adaptation. The purpose of the work reported here was to determine whether bacterial genes involved in the degradation of naphthalene and toluene were enriched in soils contaminated with gasoline and diesel fuel. These studies were also intended to evaluate the use of catabolic gene probes as biological indicators of exposure of soil microbial communities to gasoline and diesel fuel contamination. Aromatic hydrocarbons such as naphthalene and toluene are common fuel oil components [3, 28], and the bacteria responsible for degradation of these compounds are commonly present at elevated concentrations at contaminated sites. Some of the criteria for selection of probes are a knowledge of the biochemistry and genetics of the target organisms, and the genes should be conserved throughout evolution [16]. The biochemistry of the degradation of naphthalene and toluene has been well documented for many strains [1, 6 36], and catabolic genes sharing high similarities have been found among many strains capable of degrading naphthalene [21, 26, 36] and toluene [1]. Probes generated from these genes would have a high probability of detecting genotypes [12, 25], and would therefore be useful in identifying the adaptation of a community to fuel oil exposure. For these studies, concentrations of selected genes, including several involved in the degradation of benzene, toluene, ethylbenzene, xylene (BTEX), and naphthalene, were measured in subsurface soil samples collected along a gradient of BTEX concentrations at a LUST site. 