To further account for gel variations, lane files were normalized by using software that stretched or compressed banding profiles to a standard length and stored them as adjusted lane files. Adjusted lane files were transformed into Fourier space by using appropriate algorithms and were then searched for matches or compared with one another by using dendrogram software described elsewhere (14, 15, 19-21). Isolates were sorted into groups and assigned Fourier or Pearson correlation coefficients (14). A coefficient of 1.0 indicates an exact match between two banding patterns. In actual practice, experimental error, gel variations, and machine noise limited resolution to a correlation coefficient of about 0.93 for multiple runs of the same isolate (unpublished data). Previous studies indicated that microorganisms correlated above 0.90 are very closely related and are typically members of the same species or subspecies (14, 15, 19-21). Therefore, isolates with protein-banding profiles correlated at >0.90 were placed into the same group (referred to as an AMBIS group). Bacterial identification by conventional methods. Conventional identification of gasoline-degrading bacteria was performed by morphological examinations, Gram- and flagellum-staining reactions, oxidative/fermentative analyses, and inoculation and reading of NFT biochemical strips obtained from Analytab Products, Inc., Plainview, N.Y. Strips were routinely incubated at 28°C. Hydrocarbon degradation patterns of isolates. Catabolic activities of 297 isolates were evaluated by recording aerobic growth responses on the 15 different hydrocarbon substrates which were gradually introduced as vapors in sealed vessels (see Materials and Methods). Bacteria degrading the same hydrocarbon(s) were included in the same catabolic group. A total of 111 catabolic groups were delineated among the isolates screened (Fig. 2). The types of hydrocarbons catabolized by each group varied widely, but the majority of isolates favored the substituted monoaromatics as growth substrates, which is consistent with in situ adaptation to aromatic compounds prevalent in groundwater at this site (unpublished data). A total of 17 catabolic groups included degradation of the multiply branched alkane 2,2,4-trimethylpentane, and 12 groups degraded the branched cyclic alkane methylcyclopentane. Group 14 was unusual, since its members failed to grow on any of the 15 test hydrocarbons, suggesting that these isolates required one or more gasoline hydrocarbons other than the 15 evaluated. Each of the 15 test hydrocarbons was biodegraded by at least one of the 297 isolates, suggesting that the primary hydrocarbon categories of gasoline could be aerobically biodegraded in situ given appropriate conditions. Several catabolic groups (e.g., groups 38, 47, 75, 84, 94, and 105) included degradation of a single test hydrocarbon. Such groups were not the most frequently observed, as might be suspected because of their simplicity, suggesting that maintenance of multiple catabolic abilities might provide some selective advantage. Catabolic groups which included degradation of five or more test hydrocarbons were likewise infrequently observed (e.g., groups 42, 45, 51, 61. Inspection of these data indicates that most isolates were able to grow on 2 or 3 different test hydrocarbons, suggesting that retention of other numbers of catabolic activities might not offer selective advantage at this site. Growth screening also permitted determination of the frequencies at which specific test hydrocarbons were utilized by isolates. The frequencies of specific hydrocarbon degradation for 297 of the Seal Beach isolates are presented in Fig. 5. Alkylated aromatic hydrocarbons, such as toluene, p-xylene, ethylbenzene, and 1,2,4-trimethylbenzene were most frequently utilized. Approximately 75% of isolates were capable of growth on toluene vapors as a sole carbon and energy source. Benzene and naphthalene were less frequently degraded than most substituted aromatics with the exception of o-xylene, which was degraded less frequently than either compound or than its isomeric counterpart, p-xylene. 