It is interesting to note that more than 150 toluenedegrading isolates were unable to utilize toluene present as a contaminant in o-xylene (Table 2), suggesting that the concentrations of contaminating hydrocarbons were too low to support growth. The least frequently degraded compounds included the cyclic branched alkanes 2,2,4-trimethylpentane, 2-methylbutane, and methylcyclopentane. Unsubstituted linear and cyclic alkanes such as octane and cycloheptane were utilized at frequencies intermediate between those of the aromatics and branched alkanes. Polypeptide-banding pattern analysis of isolates. A total of 220 gasoline-degrading isolates was characterized by computer-programmed SDS-PAGE analysis to further explore genetic and taxonomic heterogeneity among the sample population. The dendrogram-generating algorithms which were employed restricted analyses to 75 isolates, which necessitated construction of four separate dendrograms to accommodate the 220 isolates. Bacteria composing the four initial dendrograms were sorted into tentative groups (AMBIS groups), each exhibiting intracorrelations of 0.90 or greater. Representative strains (totaling less than 75) from each of the tentative AMBIS groups were subsequently used to construct a fifth, composite dendrogram to determine which tentative groups were unique. Using this iterative strategy, a total of 51 distinct AMBIS groups were resolved, and the relationship between these is indicated in Fig. 6. Confirmatory dendrograms (not shown) were performed on each of the 51 AMBIS groups to ensure that members of each were correlated above the 0.90 level. Inspection of the dendrogram shown in Fig. 6 indicates that the Seal Beach isolates were organized into two broad clusters which were discriminated by a correlation value of about 0.47. The upper cluster consisted of the first 13 AMBIS groups, while the lower cluster comprised the remainder of the 51 groups. Each cluster was composed of members correlated with one another at a level of about 0.55 or higher. The largest AMBIS group, 33, contained 21 members, whereas 21 groups contained only one member isolate. Test hydrocarbons collectively utilized by members composing each AMBIS group are also indicated in Fig. 6. The most catabolically diverse bacteria composed the lower cluster. These isolates were able to catabolize all 15 test hydrocarbons. AMBIS groups 24, 30, 31, 33, 34, 36, 39, 41, and 43 included members which were particularly versatile in terms of hydrocarbon usage. In contrast, the upper cluster, which comprised the first 13 AMBIS groups, included isolates which were more restricted catabolically (and taxonomically; see below) than those in the lower cluster. Alkanes served as growth substrates for only one of the upper-cluster groups (AMBIS group 12), the remainder degrading only substituted aromatics. However, benzene and o-xylene were biodegraded more frequently by members of the lower cluster. Because members of single AMBIS groups often displayed different growth responses on a given test hydrocarbon, it was not feasible to reliably predict catabolic activity from protein-banding information. A total of 244 isolates (including the 220 analyzed by SDS-PAGE) were identified by conventional nutritional and biochemical tests to determine whether useful phylogenetic information could be extracted from protein-banding and catabolic-screening data. Nearly half (48.4%) of the 244 isolates were recovered from groundwater samples from well 8; the remainder were obtained from five other wells (wells 2, 7, 14, 30, and 32). Of 121 gasoline-degrading isolates recovered from well 8 groundwater, 118 were identified as Pseudomonas aeruginosa. In all, nine species of pseudomonads were identified, including P. aeruginosa (55.7%), P. putida (18.4%), P. stutzeri (7.4%), P. fluorescens (0.82%), P. acidovorans (0.82%), P. pickettii (0.41%), P. maltophilia (1.2%), P. alcaligenes (1.6%), and P. cepacia (0.41%). 