We examined the extent of biodegradation of benzene, toluene, ethylbenzene and the three isomers of xylene (BTEX) as a mixture and from gasoline in four different sediments: the New York/New Jersey Harbor estuary (polluted); Tuckerton, N.J. (pristine); Onondaga Lake, N.Y. (polluted) and Blue Mtn. Lake, N.Y. (pristine). Enrichment cultures were established with each sediment using denitrifying, sulfidogenic, methanogenic and iron reducing media, as well as site water. BTEX loss, as measured by GC-FID, was extensive in the sediments which had a long history of pollution, with all compounds being utilized within 21–91 days in the most active cultures, and was very slight or non-existent in the pristine sediments. Also, the pattern of loss was different under the various reducing conditions within each sediment and between sediments. For example benzene loss was only observed in sulfidogenic cultures from the NY/NJ Harbor sediments while toluene was degraded under all redox conditions. The loss of BTEX was correlated to the reduction of the various electron acceptors. In cultures amended with gasoline the degradation was much slower and incomplete. These results show that the fate of the different BTEX components in anoxic sediments is dependent on the prevailing redox conditions as well as on the characteristics and pollution history of the sediment. The monoaromatic hydrocarbons: benzene, ethylbenzene, toluene and o-, m-, and p-xylene (BTEX) are constituents of petroleum and its products such as gasoline and diesel fuel. Because they have a relatively high water solubility, these chemicals readily travel from spills or leaking storage tanks into groundwater and from there into drinking water supplies. Benzene is of particular concern as a pollutant because of its carcinogenicity (Dean 1985). The others are toxic to varying degrees. BTEX also moves easily into sediments and other environments where oxygen is limited. In these anoxic environments, bacteria may use nitrate, iron, sulfate or carbonate as an electron acceptor while degrading organic compounds, but these ions cannot take the place of oxygen as a reactant in aromatic ring cleavage. Because of this, bacteria have had to evolve novel pathways for anaerobic ring cleavage (Harwood & Gibson 1997). The BTEX compounds are especially difficult to degrade because they lack an activating oxygen or nitrogen substituent group which would make oxidation of the ring more energetically feasible. Although biodegradation of these hydrocarbons has been conclusively shown to occur under several anaerobic conditions, information regarding the extent of this activity, or the conditions that encourage it is limited. The capability of bacteria to anaerobically biodegrade BTEX has been clearly demonstrated. several pure strains of bacteria which mineralize toluene under denitrifying, sulfidogenic or iron-reducing conditions have been isolated (for a review see Frazer et al. 1995), as have denitrifyers which degrade ethylbenzene. Although this activity has been clearly demonstrated, it has generally been found only in highly polluted areas. Most studies have focused on a single polluted site such as a heavily trafficked harbor or an aquifer which has a history of chronic spills. Few studies have examined the variability in biodegradative capacity between different sites under different reducing conditions. Kao & Borden (1997) looked at BTEX degradation in several aquifer sediments, both polluted and clean, in denitrifying microcosms. They found that some inocula resulted in loss of toluene, ethylbenzene, m-xylene and o-xylene, whereas others showed no or reduced activity. Variation within a site, depending on the terminal electron acceptor provided was studied by Ball & Reinhard (1996) and Reinhard et al. (1997) at a gasoline contaminated aquifer. BTEX loss was observed under denitrifying and sulfidogenic conditions. 