CO 2 evolution recovered after adding the basal mineral medium containing trace elements and vitamins. The day-night fluctuation of the soil temperature indicates changes in ambient temperature in the laboratory. The addition of the mineral medium initiated a temperature increase due to higher biological activity after nutrient supply. Substrate utilization patterns with ON and SF-N plates were obtained after 1, 3, and 5 days of operation and compared with the initial conditions. The overall activity (AWCD) on the ON plates correlated well with respiration activity found during the remediation process. Ordination produced from PCA of microbial communities indicated a temporal trend toward lower values on the first and second PC (Figure 9). Evaluation of the variables that highly correlated with the first axis showed an increase in utilization of ~-hydroxybu­ tyric acid, quinic acid, and L-aspartic acid during the remediation time. Correlation to the second axis indicated a decrease in utilization of D-melibiose as carbon source. The PCA of patterns derived from SF-N plates, indicative of the metabolic activity of sporulating and filamentous microorganisms, resulted in a different ordination plot (Figure 10). Only the sample taken after 5 days was separated from previous ones. Fungi on SF-N plates showed a much slower response to the hydrocarbon mixture than bacteria on ON plates. This suggested that under these conditions the effect of slower-growing microorganisms was observed. Cell number and species diversity of microorganisms are strongly determined by the regime of the dominating environmental factors. Without doubt, pollutants entering an ecosystem will have a strong influence on biodiversity, inducing both a loss in prevailing physiological activities and a gain of new ones. Thus, it is of great interest to follow the changes in microbial diversity during the remediation process. The results presented illustrate that the analysis of the substrate utilization pattern as exemplified by the Biolog" system is a rapid and simple approach to assess the potential functional biodiversity of soil microorganisms without the tedious isolation and identification of single community members. Samples are differentiated in time series or show community changes due to different treatments. Different temporal trends become apparent in the communities. PCA separates soil samples typically on the basis of responses that are high in one community and correspondingly low in other ones. The correlation of the carbon sources tested with the principal components can be used to evaluate the functional basis for differences among the samples. Additionally, patterns of overall substrate use (AWCD) can be viewed separately from the utilization of particular categories of substrates. This provides information at different levels of functional resolution. Like other culture-based procedures, the method is selective. It only detects activities from bacteria capable of growing on the substrates and the nutrient medium provided by Biolog". Oligotrophic microorganisms and obligate anaerobic bacteria do not respond. Furthermore, the Biolog" community assay reflects a functional potential rather than an in situ activity (Garland and Mills, 1991). Haack et al. (1995) showed that Biolog" carbon source utilization profiles of whole microbial communities are reproducible and unique for different communities, but they are not simply the sum of those activities exhibited by community members when tested separately. Thus, differences in substrate utilization profiles for replicate soil samples indicate real differences in community composition, mainly due to microscale heterogeneity in the soil. 