3. Strict control of the inoculation size, because this influences the kinetics of color development (Garland et al., 1997; Winding and Hendriksen, 1997), that is, by basing inoculation on equal DNA or protein in a sample. Substrate utilization tests with Biolog®plates were used to obtain information on shifts in community composition and on changes in the metabolic diversity and activity of microorganisms in soil polluted with hydrocarbons. and/or heavy metals. Differences between the patterns of substrate utilization of endogenous microorganisms of pristine and contaminated soils were investigated by multivariate analysis. Population changes and shifts in metabolic diversity were observed both after hydrocarbon pollution or heavy metal contamination. The overall activity on the 95 Biolog" Gram-negative (GN) substrates correlated well with the respiration rate of the soil. Soils contaminated with hydrocarbons showed higher metabolic potentials than the corresponding controls. In contrast, heavy metal pollution caused both lower metabolic activity and a loss in diversity. The Biolog" assay was found to be suitable to describe changes in functional diversity of soils caused by hydrocarbon contamination or heavy metal stress. Soil is a highly heterogeneous environment consisting of abiotic solid, liquid, and gaseous phases together with various living organisms. Pore space and particle surfaces provide space for a wide range of microorganisms that play an important role in the mineralization of organic matter and the recycling of elements. In addition, a large number of contaminants found in soil are degraded and detoxified by microorganisms. Despite an increasing number of analytical techniques, diversity and physiological variability of terrestrial microbial communities are still underexplored. Only a small part of the species found in soil communities can be characterized by cultivation. Recently, biochemical and molecular biological methods have opened up new possibilities to obtain information on composition, and temporal and spatial changes in bacterial communities. Patterns of commu-nity-level, single-carbon-source utilization have been used to compare microbial communities from different habitats (Garland and Mills, 1991; Haack et aI., 1995; Winding, 1994; Wiinsche et aI., 1995; Zak et al., 1994) to monitor the impact of pesticide treatment (Engelen et aI., 1998), of heavy metals (Knight et al., 1997), or of flooding (Bossio and Scow, 1995) on the microbial community. The Biolog'" system is based on the reduction of a tetrazolium dye as a measurement of electron transport activity and the ability to oxidize 95 different carbon sources. It was originally designed for the identification and classification of pure cultures of heterotrophic bacteria (Bochner, 1989a, 1989b; Bochner and Savageau, 1977). Later, Garland and Mills (1991) extended the method to classify microbial communities of different environmental samples and to characterize their functional potential. The disposal or accidental release of organic and inorganic compounds into the environment has resulted in a worldwide pollution of soil, groundwater, and aquatic ecosystems, a main pollutant being hydrocarbons. Biodegradation of hydrocarbons by natural populations of microorganisms is well known. Many microorganisms are able to utilize these compounds as a source of energy and carbon (Bossert and Bartha, 1984; Cerniglia et al., 1992; Song et al., 1986). The massive pollution of the environment by hydrocarbons initiated the development of various technologies to treat contaminated soils, including physical, chemical, and biological remediation methods (Skladany and Metting, Jr., 1993). Bioremediation is often preferred, because the contaminants can be transformed to nonhazardous compounds at low costs, particularly by using in situ or on-site bioremediation techniques. The metabolic abilities of the microorganisms determine the rate and degree of mineralization of hydrocarbons, thus interest in quantifying impacts on the biotic component of the soil ecosystem increases. Substrate utilization patterns allow a rapid assessment of the dynamics of microbial soil communities during bioremediation as well as an estimation of their biodegradative potential. This article describes the changes in substrate utilization of the microbial community during the remediation of hydrocarbons and the effect of heavy metals in static and constantly agitated soil. Samples of pristine soil originated from the Botanical Garden of Zurich and were taken from the top layer of the A-horizon. 