B75 Enzymes involved in the anaerobic oxidation of n-alkanes: from methane to long-chain paraffins Anaerobic microorganisms play key roles in the biogeochemical cycling of methane and non-methane alkanes. To date, there appear to be at least three proposed mechanisms of anaerobic methane oxidation (AOM). The first pathway is mediated by consortia of archaeal anaerobic methane oxidizers and sulfate-reducing bacteria (SRB) via “reverse methanogenesis” and is catalyzed by a homolog of methyl-coenzyme M reductase. The second pathway is also mediated by anaerobic methane oxidizers and SRB, wherein the archaeal members catalyze both methane oxidation and sulfate reduction and zero-valent sulfur is a key intermediate. The third AOM mechanism is a nitrite-dependent, “intra-aerobic” pathway described for the denitrifying bacterium, ‘Candidatus Methylomirabilis oxyfera.’ It is hypothesized that AOM proceeds via reduction of nitrite to nitric oxide, followed by the conversion of two nitric oxide molecules to dinitrogen and molecular oxygen. The latter can be used to functionalize the methane via a particulate methane monooxygenase. With respect to non-methane alkanes, there also appear to be novel mechanisms of activation. The most well-described pathway is the addition of non-methane alkanes across the double bond of fumarate to form alkyl-substituted succinates via the putative glycyl radical enzyme, alkylsuccinate synthase (also known as methylalkylsuccinate synthase). Other proposed mechanisms include anaerobic hydroxylation via ethylbenzene dehydrogenase-like enzymes and an “intra-aerobic” denitrification pathway similar to that described for ‘Methylomirabilis oxyfera. Introduction Alkanes are saturated hydrocarbons that are derived from both natural and anthropogenic sources. Due to their apolar C-H σbonds, alkanes are considered to be among the least chemically reactive organic compounds. The activation or functionalization of alkanes is initiated via cleavage of a C-H bond. Aerobic microorganisms achieve this step via monooxygenase or dioxygenase enzymes, in which oxygen serves as both the physiological terminal electron acceptor and as a reactant (for review of mechanisms and enzymes see Austin and Groves, 2011). The role of oxygen in the functionalization of alkanes led to the belief for many years that anaerobic microorganisms would be unable to activate and utilize these compounds as growth substrates. However, research during the last 25 years has demonstrated that anaerobic microorganisms have their own novel mechanisms of activating alkanes. Anaerobic Oxidation of Methane The shortest alkane, methane, is the most environmentally relevant hydrocarbon due to its biological production by methanogenic archaea in freshwater systems, swamps, landfills, marine sediments and seeps, rice fields, and other anaerobic environments, as well as its role as a greenhouse gas (Conrad, 2009). Anaerobic methane oxidation (AOM) is thought to account for the removal of over 300 Tg of methane per year in oceanic systems (Hinrichs and Boetius, 2002; Reeburgh, 2007). Therefore, from the perspective of climate change, AOM serves as a significant greenhouse “sink.” AOM can be coupled to the reduction of sulfate, nitrate and nitrite (for reviews see Knittel and Boetius, 2011; Shen et al., 2012), manganese (Beal et al., 2009), and iron (Beal et al., 2009; Crowe et al., 2011; Sivan et al., 2011; Amos et al., 2012; Zhu et al., 2012). Although the mechanisms of aerobic methane oxidation are well-described (Austin and Groves, 2011), the mechanisms of AOM have been hotly debated. Reverse Methanogenesis To date, several studies have revealed that AOM coupled to sulfate reduction is mediated by consortia of archaeal anaerobic methane oxidizers (ANME-1, ANME-2, and ANME-3) and sulfate-reducing bacteria (SRB) (Knittel and Boetius, 2011). AOM with sulfate as the terminal electron acceptor appears to proceed via “reverse methanogenesis” (Zehnder and Brock, 1979; Hoehler et al., 1994; Hallam et al., 2004) and is catalyzed by a homolog of methyl-coenzyme M reductase (MCR), the Ni-containing enzyme responsible for the last step of methanogenesis (Krüger et al., 2003; Scheller et al., 2010a; Figure 1A). MCR homologues have been found in high concentrations in methanotrophic archaea associated with SRB (Hallam et al., 2003; Krüger et al., 2003; Heller et al., 2008; Mayr et al., 2008; Nunoura et al., 2008). In a recent study, an ANME-1 MCR complex was isolated from a Black Sea microbial mat, and the X-ray structure was reported (Shima et al., 2012). Compared to the methanogenic MCR, the ANME-1 MCR complex is similar in overall structure and contains coenzyme M and coenzyme B. However, it differs from the methanogenic MCR in that it contains an F430 variant, as well as a cysteine-rich region and an altered post-translational amino acid modification pattern (Shima et al., 2012). Although not clearly elucidated, the role of the cysteine-rich region between the F430 and the protein surface may be to operate as a redox-relay system for electron or H+/e- transport for the reduction of ANME-1 MCR from the inactive Ni2+ to the active Ni1+ oxidation state (Mayr et al., 2008; Shima et al., 2012), whereas, the altered post-translational amino acid modifications may reflect phylogenetic adaptation to environmental conditions (Shima et al., 2012) based on the distribution of different ANME groups within microbial mats (Krüger et al., 2008). The “reversibility” of MCR is supported by thermodynamic and kinetic considerations (Thauer, 2011), as well as activity assays with purified MCR from Methanothermobacter marburgensis (Scheller et al., 2010a). However, there are still several hypotheses regarding the reaction intermediates of both methane formation and methane oxidation by MCR. The two main competing theories argue either for an organometallic methyl-NiIIIF430 intermediate (Ermler et al., 1997; Dey et al., 2010) or the formation of a methyl radical and a CoM-S-NiIIF430 intermediate (Pelmenschikov et al., 2002; Pelmenschikov and Siegbahn, 2003). 