EK5, Enterobacter spp. EK3.1 and EK4 and Ochrobactrum sp. EK6, were observed to degrade several classes of substrates of petroleum hydrocarbons, such as monoaromatic, polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs), nand branched alkanes (Katsivela et al. 2003a, b). In parallel, the changes in the structure of the microbial community were assessed in parallel with the changes of the contaminant composition of the polluted soil for a time period of 4 months, which was the period of the highest degradation activity (Katsivela et al. 2003a; 2004). Marked changes in the microbial community of non-polluted soil were observed after its pollution with petroleum waste sludge. Operational Taxonomic Units (OTUs), based upon 16S rDNA sequence types and originating from the waste sludge, dominated the bacterial community of the constructed landfarm within the first 4 months treatment, suggesting their metabolic superiority with respect to the degradation of petroleum hydrocarbons. On the other hand, a number of OTUs that were not present in the control soil neither in the waste sludge were obtained after 4 months of landfarm treatment, reflecting the enrichment of bacteria with degradation capabilities under the selective pressure of petroleum pollution. The relative abundance of the soil bacteria that previously dominated the non-polluted control soil after 4 months landfarming treatment was quite low (Katsivela et al. 2004). In the present study, the changes in the structure of the microbial community have been compared with the changes of the contaminant composition of the polluted soil in-situ and onsite for a period of 14 months, in which the diversity of the microbial community was decreased with increased degradation of the petroleum hydrocarbons contained in the landfarms. Additionally, the abundances of the indigenous genera Alcaligenes, Enterobacter and Ochrobactrum were also monitored in the landfarmed soil using T-RFLP analysis of PCRamplfied 16S rDNA during the whole treatment period. In parallel, PCR with highly degenerate primers was used for the amplification of degradation genes in the extracted genomic DNA of the soil samples as well as in the isolated bacteria. In particular, the PCR amplification targeted conserved sequence elements of the degradation enzymes alkane hydroxylase B, catechol 2,3-dioxygenase (subfamily I.2.A) and naphthalene dioxygenase (Hamamura et al. 2001; Hedlund et al. 1999; Mesarch et al. 2000; Simon et al. 1993; Smits et al. 1999). 170 Materials and methods Sampling Refinery sludge, before and after landfarming treatment for 14 months, was used in this study. The samples were collected from a landfarming site of the petroleum refinery Motor Oil Hellas (Korinth Refineries, Greece), specifically designed for this project. Soil samples were collected from the surface (0–15 cm) from: (a) an untreated, nonpolluted control soil; (b) a newly produced refinery waste sludge; and (c) a landfarmed site treated with refinery waste sludge, at the beginning of the experiment (October 2000) and after 4 (February 2001), 10 (August 2001) and 14 months treatment (December 2001). Soil samples from the non-polluted control soil were collected in every sampling time and compared with the samples of the landfarmed soil. Duplicates of all samples were analysed directly after collection. Hydrocarbon extraction from soil samples The hydrocarbons present in the fresh refinery waste sludge, as well as in the landfarming soil samples, were separated by extraction, as described previously (Katsivela et al. 2004). Specifically, 2 g of soil was extracted with 140 ml of n-hexane in a Soxhlet apparatus for 2 h. The organic phase was concentrated by evaporation of the organic solvent after drying over Na2SO4. The hydrocarbon fractions were analysed, without further purification, by gas chromatography coupled with mass spectrometry (GC–MS) after drying and concentration. 