The peaks with the same fragment sizes in the different samples are labelled with the same respective peak numbers (p1–p31 in Figure 2) and indicate characteristic OTUs. The total number of peaks (i.e., the total number of OTUs), as well as the common peaks possessing the same fragment sizes (i.e., the same OTU), in each T-RFLP profile of the six different soil samples were recorded and compared. The T-RFLP profile from the landfarmed soil after the 4-month treatment, which was the point when the bacterial community exhibited the highest degradation activity (compare with Figure 1), was used as a reference. The T-RFLP profiles obtained from the landfarmed soil after 4 and 10 months of treatment contained the highest number of OTUs among the samples (26 and 24 different OTUs, respectively). The T-RFLP profiles generated from the refinery waste sludge, as well as from the landfarmed soils directly after augmentation with waste sludge, contained the same total number of OTUs, (22 different OTUs), although their compositions were different. The soil from the non-polluted control site, as well as from the landfarmed soil after 14 months of treatment, contained 16 and 15 different OTUs, respectively, indicating lower levels of diversity and complexity, at the detection limits for the methods that were used. Thus, it may be assumed that the lowest bacterial diversity was indicative of soil samples poor in carbon sources. In contrast, the microbial communities demonstrating the highest degradation activities after 4 and 10 months of landfarming treatment (as shown in Figure 1) were also the communities comprised of the highest number of OTUs. Kaplan & Kitts (2004) reported similar results of their investigations in a petroleum land treatment unit at Guadalupe. The bacterial cell counts decreased whereas the total petroleum hydrocarbons degradation rate slowed. Comparison of the T-RFLP profiles from the four landfarmed soils showed six common OTUs existing in all landfarmed soil samples, i.e., at the beginning of the experiment, after 4, 10 and 14 months of incubation (p1, p4, p12, p17, p19 and p23). OTU number p17 of the common OTUs was the same as that originating within the control soil, whereas OTU number p19 was the same as that originating from the waste sludge. Two OTUs represented newly selected bacterial OTUs (p4 and p23). However, only two OTUs were common in all six community profiles (p1 and p12). Four types of OTUs, with respect to their origins, could be recognised in the landfarmed soils: OTUs originating from the control soil; OTUs originating from the waste sludge; newly selected OTUs of low abundance in the original soil or waste sludge, but becoming dominant in the mixture; and OTUs existing in all T-RFLP profiles. As described previously, the addition of waste sludge to pristine soil resulted in dramatic changes in the microbial community. OTUs originating from the non-polluted control soil were reduced dramatically, whereas OTUs originating from the refinery waste sludge dominated the bacterial community of the constructed landfarm after 4-month treatment (Katsivela et al. 2004). In the present work, data from the monitoring of these four kinds of OTUs for a treatment period of 14 months suggests a distinct influence derived from the refinery waste sludge, an enhanced bacterial diversity at 4 and 10 months, with a progressive and marked selection, with decreased diversity, at 14 months. These data suggest that specific OTUs were associated with the different phases of petroleum degradation in the landfarmed soil. Figure 3 shows the relative abundances of the four kinds of OTUs observed in the four landfarmed soil samples with different treatment histories. As shown in Figure 3, the relative abundance of OTUs from the control soil did not exhibit any significant changes over the whole treatment time period of 14 months although the relative intensities of some peaks suggest quantitative changes over the landfarming treatment. 175 Surprisingly, some indigenous bacteria (i.e., the OTUs originating from the non-polluted control soil which survived after the pollution with refinery waste sludge) turned out to be stable over the whole treatment period. On the other hand, newly selected OTUs, as well as OTUs originating from the refinery waste sludge, dominated the bacterial community of the constructed landfarm after 4 and 10 months treatment, which was the period with the highest metabolic activity. Although the relative abundance of the bacteria originating from the refinery waste sludge increased after augmentation, a decrease in OTU abundance was observed over the treatment time period of 14 months. The highest numbers of newly selected OTUs were present in the T-RFLP profiles at the time with the highest degradation activity (in 4 and 10 months old landfarms), suggesting their metabolic superiority in this period (Figures 1 and 2). The isolation of four bacterial strains with degradation capabilities towards petroleum hydrocarbons from landfarming soils was reported previously, i.e., Alcaligenes sp. EK5, Enterobacter spp. EK3.1 and EK4 and Ochrobactrum sp. 