Control experiments using P. oleovorans GPo1, P. putida mt-2 (pWWO) and P. putida G7 as strains reported to harbour alkane hydroxylase AlkB, catechol 2,3-dioxygenase (subfamily I.2.A) and naphthalene dioxygenase nahAc yielded PCR fragments of the expected length of 557, 238, and 630 bp, respectively. DNA extracted from the refinery waste sludge showed a PCR product using catechol 2,3-dioxygenase specific primers with a size of 238 bp (Figure 5, lane 3). This result suggests the presence of bacteria containing catechol 2,3-dioxygenase (subfamily I.2.A), which is an enzyme involved in the degradation of a large group of aromatic compounds. Also, a PCR product generated using the primers for alkane hydroxylase AlkB was obtained from the DNA extracted from the refinery waste sludge. However, the size of the PCR product (485 bp) differed significantly from the one expected (630 bp), indicating the absence of alkane hydroxylase genes in the tested soils. Surprisingly, none of the other analysed soil samples showed any positive PCR products. The lack of PCR products of the alkane hydroxylase AlkB gene, contrasts the active degradation of n-alkanes in the landfarmed soils, and may suggest that the degrading bacteria contain alkane oxidation enzyme systems that are unrelated or only distantly related to AlkB. Alternatively, potential PCR inhibitors coextracted with DNA, non-amplifying DNA, soil factors (humics), and soil pollutants (petroleum hydrocarbons) could have disturbed the PCR detection of the reported genes. Besides DNA extracted from the soil samples, four bacterial strains with degradation capabilities, Alcaligenes sp. EK5, Enterobacter spp. EK3.1 and EK4 and Ochrobactrum sp. EK6, previously isolated from the landfarms (Katsivela et al. 2003a, b), were also analysed by the same PCR approach. None of the four analysed bacterial strains showed any PCR product for the genes encoding alkane hydroxylase AlkB, catechol 2,3-dioxygenase (subfamily I.2.A) and naphthalene dioxygenase nahAc. The lack of the expected PCR products of the three tested degradation genes in genomic DNA of the four isolated bacteria may be due to existence of gene sequences completely different from those characterised from bacteria of the genus Pseudomonas. Alternatively, these bacteria may contain genes homologues in which the regions that were used to develop the primers were not so well conserved. 