16S rDNA sequences retrieved from the uncontaminated site with Geobacteraceae-targeted primers (Geo-2, Geo-3, and Geo-43) fell within a tight phylogenetic cluster that appeared to fall outside of the Geobacteraceae family (Fig. 5). These sequences were distinct from those retrieved from site IR-3 and may represent deeply branching delta proteobacteria (Fig. 5). Benzene-oxidizing enrichment culture. A sediment-free enrichment culture which reduced Fe(III) in a medium with benzene as the sole electron donor and poorly crystalline Fe(III) oxide as the sole electron acceptor was established with sediments from site 96-1. Site 96-1 is analogous to site IR-3 in that it was determined to be within the Fe(III)-reducing zone of the aquifer and to actively degrade benzene under in situ conditions (4). Benzene-degrading enrichment cultures could not be established with sediments from the uncontaminated site. When [14C]benzene was added to the enrichment culture 14CO2 was produced over time, with ca. 25% of the [14C]benzene added to cultures being mineralized to 14CO2 within 25 days. Thus, it was clearly demonstrated that this enrichment could anaerobically oxidize benzene. DGGE analysis of 16S rDNA retrieved from benzene-oxidizing enrichment cultures revealed three distinct bands (data not shown), with the most intense band (Benz-76) representing an organism closely related to G. chapellei (Fig. 5). Comparative sequence analysis revealed that one of the remaining bands (Benz-88) was closely related to Variovorax paradoxus HW1 (20) and an unidentified toluene degrader, D8 (33), while the second remaining band (Benz-88) was closely related to G. fermentans. The results from molecular phylogenetic analysis of sediments and enrichment cultures, as well as the PLFA analysis, demonstrate that anaerobic benzene mineralization under Fe(III)-reducing conditions is associated with increased numbers of Geobacter spp. This finding might have been predicted from previous pure-culture studies because Geobacter spp. are the only organisms available in culture that are known to oxidize aromatic compounds with the reduction of Fe(III) (10, 22, 25, 28). However, it is generally considered that the most environmentally significant microorganisms are not readily recovered in laboratory cultures (2). Furthermore, the Geobacter spp. currently in culture are not known to metabolize benzene. Therefore, it was not necessarily expected that organisms closely related to the Geobacter spp. that are available in pure culture would predominate in the zone of active benzene degradation at Bemidji. These results, and the fact that a Geobacter species was a dominant organism in a benzenedegrading, Fe(III)-reducing enrichment culture that was established from the zone of benzene degradation, suggest that it may be possible to culture the environmentally significant microorganisms from the Fe(III)-reducing zone of petroleumcontaminated aquifers. Comparative studies with MPN-PCR and PLFA analyses. The Bemidji aquifer provides the only site as yet described in which benzene is anaerobically degraded under in situ Fe(III)- reducing conditions (4, 5). Although benzene oxidation coupled to Fe(III) reduction was previously reported in other aquifer sediments (31, 32), in those cases benzene degradation only took place when the availability of Fe(III) was increased with chelators or humic substances that serve as electron shuttles to Fe(III) (27). Other aromatic hydrocarbons, including toluene and naphthalene, are also degraded under Fe(III)- reducing conditions at the Bemidji site (5). However, the degradation of these hydrocarbons is not localized at only one site as is benzene degradation. Since attempts to obtain pure cultures of benzene-degrading Fe(III) reducers have as yet been unsuccessful, it was considered that comparative studies between sites that were geochemically similar but differed in the capacity to degrade benzene might reveal microorganisms specifically associated with anaerobic benzene degradation. 