Comparison of DGGE patterns from all five sites along the petroleum contaminant gradient at Bemidji indicated major differences in microbial community structure between the uncontaminated site, the Fe(III)-reducing sites (sites IR-3, IR-2, and IR-1, in order of increasing contamination), and the FIG. 1. Hierarchical cluster analysis of PLFAs extracted from sediment samples from IR-1, IR-2, IR-3, and the uncontaminated site. FIG. 2. Distribution of Geobacteraceae-indicative PLFA functional groups at sites IR-1, IR-2, and IR-3 and the uncontaminated site. 3058 ROONEY-VARGA ET AL. APPL. ENVIRON. MICROBIOL. Downloaded from http://aem.asm.org/ on June 22, 2017 by INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY NEW DELHI methanogenic (most heavily contaminated) site (Fig. 3). While the overall DGGE patterns did not differ drastically within the Fe(III)-reducing zone, several differences between site IR-3 and sites IR-1 and IR-2 were apparent. These included a much higher intensity of the bands representing Geo-83 and Geo-125 at site IR-3, as well as the presence of several faint bands at sites IR-1 and IR-2 that were not recovered from site IR-3. Bands representing Beta-145 and Gthrx-84 were clearly evident at all of the Fe(III)-reducing sites. Phylogenetic diversity of Geobacteraceae in sediment community. Because of the apparent enrichment of Geobacteraceae in the Fe(III)-reducing sediments that were most active in benzene degradation, the diversity of the Geobacteraceae was examined in more detail with the primer sets designed to specifically target Geobacteraceae. The DGGE patterns from the uncontaminated and benzene-oxidizing sediments revealed marked differences in their Geobacteraceae populations, with no shared sequences apparent. Two 16S rDNA fragments (Geo-83 and Geo-60) were consistently found in PCR products from the benzene-oxidizing sediments from site IR-3 (Fig. 7). Geo-83 was identical in sequence to one of the predominant sequences retrieved from site IR-3 with the less-specific bacterial primers. Like Geo-83, Geo-60 was most closely related to G. chapellei and Pelobacter propionicus. Geo-83 and Geo-60 were the dominant PCR products under several different analysis conditions, including extraction of DNA by a freeze-thaw method (see Materials and Methods), amplification by a seminested PCR protocol (with primers 8F [44] and Geo825R followed by primers 338F-GC and Geo-825R), and 1025 dilution of template DNA prior to amplification (data not shown). In addition to these two predominant bands, 16S rDNA amplified from site IR-3 contained several bands of much lower intensity (Geo-58, Geo-48, and Geo-47), which were not members of the Geobacter cluster. Phylogenetic analysis of these sequences suggested that they were deeply branching members of the delta subclass of the proteobacteria and indicated that they probably represent undescribed genera (Fig. 5). However, especially because the current analysis is limited to about 300 base positions, it is difficult to infer phylogenetic relationships of sequences with no known close relatives. In contrast to the results from site IR-3, the DGGE patterns from the uncontaminated zone varied considerably among triplicates or when sediment DNA was diluted prior to amplification (Fig. 7). 