Results of MPN-PCR studies with PCR primers specific for microorganisms in the family Geobacteraceae reported here and previously (4) indicated that the benzene-degrading sedi- FIG. 4. DGGE analysis of 16S rDNA fragments amplified from the uncontaminated site (Uncont.) and benzene-oxidizing site IR-3 with primers that target 16S rDNAs of most bacteria in several different denaturant gradient ranges. FIG. 5. 16S rRNA phylogenetic tree of Geobacteraceae and delta proteobacterial sequences from the uncontaminated site and site IR-3 and from benzeneoxidizing enrichment cultures. Phylogenetic trees were constructed by using maximum-parsimony methods with 100 bootstrapped data sets. A total of 366 base positions were considered in the analysis. Bootstrap values of greater than 50 (of 100 trees) are shown adjacent to the nodes. The scale bar is in fixed nucleotide substitutions per 100 sequence positions. A similar tree topology was observed for trees constructed by using least-squares methods (data not shown). 3060 ROONEY-VARGA ET AL. APPL. ENVIRON. MICROBIOL. Downloaded from http://aem.asm.org/ on June 22, 2017 by INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY NEW DELHI ments from site IR-3 had significantly more Geobacteraceae than did the other sediments. The PLFA analysis also suggested that there was an enrichment of Geobacteraceae at site IR-3. However, the PLFA data further indicated that there was a general increase in the microbial population at site IR-3, suggesting that, in addition to Geobacteraceae, other microorganisms were also enriched at this site. Therefore, in order to more fully explore the microbial populations that might be involved in benzene degradation, the microbial community was analyzed in more detail with DGGE. Comparison of overall bacterial diversity with DGGE. Although PCR-DGGE analysis has several potential limitations (13, 18, 50), this approach was clearly effective in identifying the major shifts in the microbial community in the Bemidji aquifer. In an attempt to avoid biases, primers that targeted bacteria were employed under low-stringency conditions at annealing temperatures with a minimum number of amplification cycles. It seems likely from analysis of triplicate sediment DNA extractions that any PCR biases inherent in this approach were consistent between samples and thus differences in DGGE profiles between sites reflected major differences in the composition of the environmental DNA templates. The fairly simple DGGE patterns obtained with domainlevel primers suggests that relatively few species dominated at each of the Bemidji sites, especially at the uncontaminated site. This conclusion is also supported by community PLFA profiles, which exhibited relatively low diversity compared to surficial soils. The apparent simplicity of these subsurface microbial communities is not surprising given the low availability of organic carbon and nutrients generally found in subsurface sediments (3, 5, 16). Other studies of phylogenetic diversity in subsurface microbial communities have also indicated relatively low levels of diversity (8, 36) compared to surficial soil communities (9, 15, 41). The DGGE profiles indicated that the microbial community composition differed markedly among the aerobic, Fe(III)- reducing, and methanogenic zones of the aquifer. 