Since the specificity of the initial dioxygenases appears to be provided by the subunits of two-component terminal oxygenase of aromatic dioxygenases [30] this may be a reflection of the narrow specificity of the car encoded pathway of Sphingomonas CB3. carAa encodes for a large (a) subunit of the iron sulfur component of the initial dioxygenase. The predicted amino acid sequence contains a Rieske-type [2Fe-2S] motif of conserved Cys75,95 and His77,98 residues which is a feature of these subunits. carAb encodes the small (b) subunit of the iron sulfur component of the initial dioxygenase. CarAc shows homology to the ferredoxin subunits of initial dioxygenases. In common with ferredoxin subunits of this type, CarAc has a conserved binding motif for a Rieske-type [2Fe-2S] centre presented by Cys43,62 and His45,65. carAd encodes the reductase subunit of the initial dioxygenase, the amino acid sequence is predicted to be a membrane-associated protein. Unlike the car genes from CA10, CB3 has a gene encoding a dihydrodiol dehydrogenase which we have designated CarB. carC encodes for an extradiol dioxygenase enzyme. CarC contains the amino acid residues - His147, His 211 and Glu 262 - which are conserved in extradiol dioxygenases where they are implicated in iron coordination by the active enzyme [31,32]. carD encodes for a hydrolase which shows most homology to biphenyl pathway hydrolases. A closer phylogenetic analysis of the individual CB3 car genes consistently places these sequences away from the main groups which represent sequences derived from biphenyl degrading, as well as naphthalene/phenanthrene-degrading strains. Two examples are provided. The first (Figure 3) reveals that CarAa is more closely related to, yet distinct from, the corresponding bph sequences than to CarAa from CA10 [5,6]. The second example (Figure 4) is provided by CarC which is also divergent and placed in a position intermediate to that of the corresponding genes from biphenyl of naphthalene degrading strains. Phylogenetic analysis revealed that the remaining CB3 car genes all occupy similarly divergent positions. Pathway Specificity and Induction of the car Genes Transcriptional analysis has confirmed that this car locus is expressed during growth of CB3 at the expense of carbazole, and since no other aromatic hydrocarbon can serve as a growth substrate we propose these are unique car genes. By applying RT-PCR using the primer pair C1036/C2495 we were able to amplify carAa(partial)/carAb/carAc/carAd(partial) from mRNA extracted from carbazole-grown cells (Figure 5). No RTPCR product was amplified from mRNA extracted from acetate-grown CB3 cells. Experiments using biphenyl and carbazole as independent inducers of acetate-grown cells of CB3 revealed that both carbazole and biphenyl were able to act as inducers of the car locus (Figure 5). This is particularly interesting as biphenyl does not serve as a growth substrate for CB3 and was not transformed by cells of CB3 growing at the expense of carbazole. As biphenyl is able to induce expression of the car operon it would appear that the substrate specificity of the terminal oxygenase component the initial dioxygenase enzyme complex is narrow, and does not extend to biphenyl thus preventing its transformation. This would appear different to the carbazole 1,9a-dioxygenase from CA10 has been shown to readily oxidise biphenyl [6]. Interestingly resting cell assays have been used to show that both naphthalene 1,2-dioxygenase and biphenyl 2,3-dioxygenase enzymes are able to oxidise carbazole [33], however this oxidation does not occur in an angular position as described for the car pathway of CA10 [2,5,6]. The lower enzymes of the car locus would not constitute a metabolic block to biphenyl catabolism as these are able to transform intermediates of the biphenyl pathway. CarCD-expressing clones transform the arene diol 2,3-dihydroxybiphenyl to the yellow metacleavage product 2-hydroxy-6-oxo-6-phenylhexa-2,4dienoate, which is further metabolised by the hydrolase activity of CarD resulting in the disappearance of the yellow meta-cleavage product (data not shown). The gene sequences of the car locus show sufficient homology to isofunctional genes involved in the degradation of other aromatic compounds for common ancestries to be shared [1]. We speculate that this car operon is related to ancestral bph genes which share a common evolutionary background evolving to degrade biphenyl and its naturally occurring analogues. Evidence to support this supposition includes the following; (i) The ability of biphenyl to act as a non-metabolisable inducer of the car genes may signal a recent divergence which allowed the enzymes of this operon to utilise carbazole instead of biphenyl as a growth substrate. 