Novel Carbazole Degradation Genes ofSphingomonasCB3: Sequence Analysis, Transcription, and Molecular Ecology The degradation of aromatic compounds by bacteria is dependent upon specific catabolic operons. The unique car locus isolated from Sphingomonas CB3 encodes the first four enzymes involved in the catabolism of the azaarene carbazole. These include a class II three-component dioxygenase enzyme system, a dihydrodiol dehydrogenase, an extradiol (meta-cleavage) dioxygenase, and a hydrolase. Homology of deduced amino acid sequences is closer to corresponding biphenyl catabolic genes than to previously characterised carbazole degradation genes. Gene arrangement is also identical to that found in some bph loci. The car genes are transcribed when carbazole is utilised as a sole carbon source, and although biphenyl does not serve as a growth substrate for Sphingomonas CB3 it is able to act as a non-metabolisable inducer of the car locus. Ecologically the car genes were detected in polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon (PAH) contaminated soil associated with a former town gas site. q 1998 curs via an initial angular dioxygenation yielding 2 aminobiphenyl-2,3-diol which is subsequently cleaved by an extradiol dioxygenase. An alternative pathway via indole acetic acid may also play a role in carbazole degradation by LD2 [3]. Recently the genes involved in the degradation of carbazole by CA10 have been isolated using Tn-5 induced mutational inactivation [4], and subsequently described in detail [5,6]. The characterised genes encode a novel class III initial dioxygenase, carbazole 1,9a-dioxygenase, a divergent extradiol dioxygenase (meta-cleavage) enzyme and a meta-cleavage compound hydrolase. To date there is only one other report [5,6] on the molecular biology of catabolic pathways specific for the azaarene carbazole. In this paper we describe 6085-bp of nucleotide sequence of a divergent catabolic locus isolated from Sphingomonas (formerly Pseudomonas) strain CB3 which is able to utilise carbazole as sole carbon and nitrogen source [7]. Academic Press MATERIALS AND METHODS Microbial catabolism of aromatic compounds follows predictable routes which fall into distinct segments: conversion of the growth substrate to an arene diol or substituted arene diol, followed by ring cleavage, with further catabolism of the ring-cleavage product ultimately feeding through to central metabolism. Many of these pathways show a high degree of conservation at the level of gene organization, gene size, and homology of the corresponding enzymes [1]. Catabolic pathways have been described for the microbial degradation of carbazole by Pseudomonas sp. strains CA10 [2], and LD2 [3]. Metabolite analysis suggests that carbazole degradation in CA10 and LD2 oc1 Corresponding author. Landcare Research, Private Bag 3127, Hamilton, New Zealand. Fax: (64) 7 838 4442. E-mail: lloyd-jonesg@ landcare.cri.nz. Bacterial strains. Sphingomonas CB3 is able to grow at the expense of the azaarene carbazole and has been described previously [7]. Sequencing of the 16S rDNA gene from strain CB3 has subsequently revealed its closest relative, at 99% homology, to be Sphingomonas subarctica. DNA manipulation and sequencing. A clone library was generated in Escherichia coli DH5a using EcoRI-digested genomic DNA prepared from Sphingomonas CB3 [8] ligated into pUC18. All recombinant manipulations were performed according to established methodologies [9] and in accordance with manufacturer’s instructions. Colonies harbouring recombinant plasmids were screened for the expression of extradiol dioxygenase activity by the ability to form the yellow ring-fission product 2-hydroxymuconic semialdehyde on spraying colonies with 100 mM catechol [10]. A nested deletion series was generated from the overlapping clones pJO05-01 and pJO12 using a double-stranded Nested Deletion Kit (Pharmacia Biotech). 