B84 Microbial Degradation of Alkyl Carbazoles in Norman Wells Crude Oil Department of Microbiology, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada T6G 2E9 Received 26 September 1983/Accepted 24 January 1984 Norman Wells crude oil was fractionated by sequential alumina and silicic acid column chromatography methods. The resulting nitrogen-rich fraction was analyzed by gas chromatography-mass spectrometry and showed 26 alkyl (Cl to C5) carbazoles to be the predominant compounds. An oil-degrading mixed bacterial culture was enriched on carbazole to enhance its ability to degrade nitrogen heterocycles. This culture was used to inoculate a series of flasks of mineral medium and Norman Wells crude oil. Residual oil was recovered from these cultures after incubation at 25°C for various times. The nitrogen-rich fraction was analyzed by capillary gas chromatography, using a nitrogen-specific detector. Most of the Cl-, C2-, and C3- carbazoles and one of the C4-isomers were degraded within 8 days. No further degradation occurred when incubation was extended to 28 days. The general order of susceptibility of the isomers to biodegradation was C1 > C2 > C3 > C4. The carbazole-enriched culture was still able to degrade n-alkanes, isoprenoids, aromatic hydrocarbons, and sulfur heterocycles in the crude soil. Crude oil is an extremely complex mixture of organic compounds. When introduced into the environment, it provides a variety of substrates for the indigenous microbial population. An increased understanding of the ability of microorganisms to change the chemical composition of oil has been gained as new analytical methods have been applied to study residual oil from laboratory experiments. Examples of such analytical techniques include computerized mass spectrometry (23), 13C nuclear magnetic resonance spectometry (11), capillary gas chromatography (GC) (5), and capillary GC coupled with a sulfur-specific detector (7). The analyses of oil from environmental samples have also shown chemical changes due, to a large extent, to microbial activity (2, 21, 25, 26). Early investigations focused on losses of the n-alkanes (1, 12), whereas more recent work has considered the aromatic compounds (5, 17) and the sulfur heterocycles (7). However, there is very little information on the ability of microorganisms to degrade the nitrogen compounds in oil. Petroleum contains between 0.1 and 2% nitrogen (20), with most crude oils containing less than 0.3% (22). The three major groups of nitrogen compounds in petroleum fractions boiling below 538°C (1,000°F) are pyridine derivatives (including quinolines and phenanthridines), indole derivatives (including pyrroles, carbazoles, and benzocarbazoles), and aromatic amides (19). Although nitrogen-containing compounds can be found throughout the boiling ranges, there is a tendency for such components to be found in the higher-boiling fractions and residues. Oils of high American Petroleum Institute gravity tend to have higher nitrogen contents than those with low gravities. The presence of nitrogen compounds in oils can lead to the poisoning of catalysts used in the cracking of oil for commercial uses (20). As the availability of high-quality, low-boiling crude oils decreases, the trend is to the increased use of oils containing more nitrogen. Many authors have used enrichment cultures to isolate procaryotes that are capable of degrading pure nitrogen heterocycles. For example, Watson and Cain (24) have Corresponding author. 858 described the metabolism of pyridine by a Bacillus sp. and a Nocardia sp., both of which use this compound as a sole carbon, nitrogen, and energy source. Stafford and Callely (D. A. Stafford and A. G. Callely, J. Gen. Microbiol. 63:xiv, 1970) reported on a gram-negative isolate which can grow on pyridine and 4-methylpyridine but not on the 2-methyl or 3- methyl isomers. 