Ulrich & Edwards (2003) investigated the community structure of a methanogenic consortium originally enriched from the sediment of a contaminated aquifer, which first used sulfate as an electron acceptor before switching to methanogenesis. A Desulfobacterium species and a member of the Peptococcaceae were the dominant phylotypes; however, it was not clear which of both species attacks benzene initially. Recently, Kunapuli et al. (2007) characterized the community structure of a benzene-degrading iron-reducing consortium by stable isotope probing. A member of the Peptococcaceae was shown to assimilate benzene primarily, but also a member of the Desulfobulbaceae and members of the Actinobacteria were prominent, indicating a syntrophic relationship during the course of benzene degradation. Compared with the consortia described above, the sand- and lava-associated communities are more diverse and comprise only a small proportion of Desulfobacteraceae. In the consortium ZzBs1-4, the proportion of Desulfobacteraceae increased after the shift from benzene to toluene, phenol or benzoate (Fig. 6). In contrast to the consortia described above, ZzBs1-4 contains a large proportion of other Deltaproteobacteria like Desulfovibrio, which are not assumed to use aromatic substrates, and other bacteria not known as sulfate reducers. Similarly, in the lava-associated community only a small proportion of Deltaproteobacteria was detected. Except for the Cryptanaerobacter/Pelotomaculum phylotype, both communities are very different in their phylogenetic composition although they were inoculated with the same groundwater. These results form the basis for our hypothesis that benzene is not degraded by single sulfate reducers in the sand- and lava-associated communities, but by syntrophic interactions of several different organisms. We suggest that only one phylotype, originating from the groundwater percolating the column system, can initially attack benzene in our communities. If this phylotype could metabolize benzene completely, one would expect an aromatic-degrading organism using sulfate as an electron acceptor (likely a phylotype related to other typical aromatic-degrading sulfate reducers). Because no other organisms could grow under such circumstances in considerable amounts besides the benzene degrader, the respective phylotype should be dominant (≥50%) in community analyses, as observed for example by Musat & Widdel (2008)– but this is not the case in our consortia. Therefore, we postulate that a member of the Cryptanaerobacter/Pelotomaculum group is responsible for the initial attack of benzene in our enrichments. Interestingly, a member of the family Peptococcaceae dominated in the aquifer-derived methanogenic benzene-degrading enrichment culture examined by Ulrich & Edwards (2003). It might be capable of attacking benzene as well, as postulated recently for a member of the Peptococcaceae in a consortium growing on benzene under iron-reducing conditions (Kunapuli et al., 2007). Aquifers are rather oligotrophic environments and are characterized by conditions that favor slow-growing organisms with low energy demands. The capability to survive long starvation periods as well as an independence from specific electron acceptors might be favorable. Spore-forming fermenters degrading aromatic compounds in syntrophic association with methanogens, sulfate-reducers or iron-reducers might be indigenous in subsurface sediments and thus predestined to develop in benzene-polluted aquifers, at least in the sulfidic, methanogenic or iron-reducing zones. Thermodynamic considerations and a functional model for syntrophic benzene degradation under sulfate-reducing conditions The mineralization of benzene with sulfate as an electron acceptor is thermodynamically favorable as it allows synthesizing up to three ATP at 60 kJ mol−1 (Schink, 1997): image(1) As reasoned above, we assume that a syntrophic association rather than a single member of our communities mineralizes benzene. Support for the involvement of syntrophic associations in benzene degradation by the consortium ZzBs1-4 emerges from the observation that cell detachment and disaggregation at intensities that commonly do not lead to cell damage resulted in the loss of the communities' ability to degrade benzene. The initial step of benzene degradation under anoxic conditions might be a methylation, a hydroxylation or a carboxylation reaction (Caldwell & Suflita, 2000; Ulrich et al., 2005). Benzoate is a very likely central intermediate in the anaerobic degradation pathway of benzene, because all known degradation pathways of aromatics under anoxic conditions are channeled into benzoate or benzoyl-coenzyme A (Widdel & Rabus, 2001; Boll et al., 2002). Benzoate has also been found in benzene-degrading consortia under iron-reducing (Botton & Parsons, 2007), nitrate-reducing, sulfate-reducing and methanogenic conditions (Caldwell & Suflita, 2000; Ulrich et al., 2005). However, the conversion of benzene to benzoate is thermodynamically unfavorable. image(2) Hence, a putative anaerobic benzene degrader cannot grow at the expense of reaction (2), but has to oxidize benzoate further to gain energy for ATP synthesis. We assume that acetate and hydrogen are central intermediates at least in the consortium ZzBs1-4, due to the presence of several phylotypes related to acetate- and hydrogen-consuming sulfate reducers, as discussed above. 