The relative T-RF abundances of the Sulfurovum-like phylotype were also higher with benzene compared with the other substrates. Members of the Desulfobacteraceae became more dominant when benzoate, phenol and toluene were used as substrates. Furthermore, a larger proportion of other phylotypes (T-RF that were not assigned) was present in the cultures grown on benzoate, toluene or phenol, compared with the culture grown on benzene. It therefore appeared that the Cryptanaerobacter/Pelotomaculum- and Sulfurovum-like phylotypes were outcompeted by other groups when shifted from benzene to other aromatic substrates, whereas the Cryptanaerobacter/Pelotomaculum phylotype was further enriched after prolonged cultivation on benzene (270 days). Discussion Community composition and implications for syntrophic benzene degradation under sulfate-reducing conditions Despite their common origin from a benzene-contaminated aquifer and their shared ability to degrade benzene with sulfate as an electron acceptor at comparable rates (Vogt et al., 2007), bacterial communities established on sand particles and lava granules differed remarkably. The only phylotype present in similarly substantial proportions on both materials (Figs 1 and 6) was a member of the Cryptanaerobacter/Pelotomaculum group. Sequences retrieved from both the lava granules and the sand consortium ZzBs1-4 are highly similar and form a distinct cluster within Desulfotomaculum cluster I (Fig. 2). The cultivated species of the genera Pelotomaculum and Cryptanaerobacter are syntrophic, heterotrophic bacteria, which live closely associated with hydrogen-consuming organisms (interspecies hydrogen transfer). Some of them were shown to degrade aromatic compounds like benzoate, phenol or phthalate (Qiu et al., 2003, 2006; Juteau et al., 2005). In contrast to members of the related genus Desulfotomaculum, Pelotomaculum and Cryptanaerobacter species do not use sulfate as an electron acceptor. It has been hypothesized that these genera, also termed Desulfotomaculum subcluster Ih, have lost their ancestral ability of sulfate respiration as they adopted a syntrophic lifestyle to thrive in methanogenic environments (Imachi et al., 2006). Assuming that the Cryptanaerobacter/Pelotomaculum phylotype detected in the lava- and sand-associated communities has conserved the ability to reduce sulfate, it might be able to oxidize benzene completely. Although we cannot rule out this possibility altogether, it appears rather unlikely considering the communities' composition. As explained below, we suggest that this Pelotomaculum/Cryptanaerobacter-like phylotype represents a syntrophic organism responsible for the initiation of the observed anaerobic benzene degradation. The dominant phylotype in the clone library generated from the lava granules was a member of the Nitrospira phylum related to the genus Magnetobacterium. Because most relatives described hitherto are environmental clones that have not been cultivated so far, the possible physiological function of the Magnetobacterium-like phylotype in the lava community remains unknown. The closest relatives are environmental clones retrieved from sulfate-containing wetlands (Acc. nos. DQ137961, DQ137982), a forested wetland impacted by reject coal (Brofft et al., 2002) and a PCB-contaminated salt marsh sediment (Acc. no. AF286037). The next cultured relatives are sulfur reducers of the genus Thermodesulfovibrio. Candidatus ‘Magnetobacterium bavaricum’ has been suggested to be a chemolithoautotroph with an iron-dependent mode of energy conservation (Spring et al., 1993). Recently, in a stable isotope probing experiment with 13C-labeled acetate, Magnetobacterium-like organisms were found to metabolize acetate in a methanogenic sediment (Schwarz et al., 2007). The physiological role of the Sulfurovum-like phylotype, which dominated the sand-derived microcosms, is not clear, either. As for the Magnetobacterium group, most sequences found for Sulfurovum relatives stem from environmental clones and not from cultivated species. Members of this genus were often found in sulfidic habitats (Campbell et al., 2006). A highly similar phylotype was retrieved from a phenol-degrading, methanogenic bioreactor (Zhang et al., 2005). 