Bacterial Community Dynamics and Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbon Degradation during Bioremediation of Heavily Creosote-Contaminated Soil. Bacterial community dynamics and biodegradation processes were examined in a highly creosote-contaminated soil undergoing a range of laboratory-based bioremediation treatments. The dynamics of the eubacterial community, the number of heterotrophs and polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon (PAH) degraders, and the total petroleum hydrocarbon (TPH) and PAH concentrations were monitored during the bioremediation process. TPH and PAHs were significantly degraded in all treatments (72 to 79% and 83 to 87%, respectively), and the biodegradation values were higher when nutrients were not added, especially for benzo(a)anthracene and chrysene. The moisture content and aeration were determined to be the key factors associated with PAH bioremediation. Neither biosurfactant addition, bioaugmentation, nor ferric octate addition led to differences in PAH or TPH biodegradation compared to biodegradation with nutrient treatment. All treatments resulted in a high first-order degradation rate during the first 45 days, which was markedly reduced after 90 days. A sharp increase in the size of the heterotrophic and PAH-degrading microbial populations was observed, which coincided with the highest rates of TPH and PAH biodegradation. At the end of the incubation period, PAH degraders were more prevalent in samples to which nutrients had not been added. Denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis analysis and principal-component analysis confirmed that there was a remarkable shift in the composition of the bacterial community due to both the biodegradation process and the addition of nutrients. At early stages of biodegradation, the α-Proteobacteria group (genera Sphingomonas and Azospirillum) was the dominant group in all treatments. At later stages, the γ-Proteobacteria group (genus Xanthomonas), the α-Proteobacteria group (genus Sphingomonas), and the Cytophaga-Flexibacter-Bacteroides group (Bacteroidetes) were the dominant groups in the nonnutrient treatment, while the γ-Proteobacteria group (genus Xathomonas), the β-Proteobacteria group (genera Alcaligenes and Achromobacter), and the α-Proteobacteria group (genus Sphingomonas) were the dominant groups in the nutrient treatment. This study shows that specific bacterial phylotypes are associated both with different phases of PAH degradation and with nutrient addition in a preadapted PAH-contaminated soil. Our findings also suggest that there are complex interactions between bacterial species and medium conditions that influence the biodegradation capacity of the microbial communities involved in bioremediation processes. Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) are a class of fused-ring aromatic compounds that are ubiquitous environmental pollutants (13). Microorganisms play an important role in the degradation of PAHs in terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems, and microbial degradation is the main process in natural decontamination. Enhancement of this phenomenon is the basis of bioremediation technologies (2). Microbial degradation of PAHs in soil is restricted by various factors that often result in a lower-than-expected bioremediation efficiency. One of these factors is the low bioavailability of the compounds. In a recent study (1) we described significant enhancement of the biodegradation of high-molecular-weight PAHs and alkylated derivatives of these compounds from Casablanca crude oil caused by a microbial consortium in the presence of a biosurfactant produced by Pseudomonas aeruginosa strain AT10. Another important factor in bioremediation of contaminated soils is the availability of nitrogen and phosphorus, which allows the necessary increase in the size of the hydrocarbon-degrading microbial populations. Taking into account the fact that each contaminated site can respond in a different way to distinct parameters that affect microbial biodegradation, laboratory-scale bioremediation protocols have been developed in order to determine the effects of different conditions (30). In such feasibility studies, addition of nutrients, biosurfactants, exogenous inocula, or other additives can be assayed. Nevertheless, in almost all of these studies monitoring of the process is based on chemical analysis of contaminants. A better understanding of the diversity of the microbial communities inhabiting PAH-contaminated soils and their response to different biostimulation or bioaugmentation strategies could provide clues about the type of bacteria that are able to adapt to and exploit such habitats. It is well known that the majority of microbes in environmental samples cannot be cultured at present in laboratory media, which are biased for the growth of specific microorganisms (5, 34). In light of this, molecular biological techniques offer new opportunities. For example, denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis (DGGE) allows us to directly determine the presence and relative levels of different 16S rRNA gene amplicons both qualitatively and semiquantitatively in order to perform a community analysis (15). Although there has been much research on the bacterial community structure associated with bioremediation of different kinds of environmental pollutants (18, 23, 26), little is known about bioremediation of PAH-contaminated soils. 