As shown in Table 3, our results suggest that nutrient addition had a negative effect on late-stage biodegradation of four-ring PAHs and TPHs. The presence of an excess of nutrients could have inhibited the biodegradation of high-molecular-weight PAHs. In fact, Rhykerd et al. (27) described a reduction in bioremediation of a motor oil due to an increase in the salinity produced by NaCl, and Braddock et al. (10) attributed a reduction in the microbial activity of an Arctic hydrocarbon-contaminated soil to the salinity produced by an excess of nutrients. In a recent study, Roling-Wilfred et al. (29) suggested that the addition of nutrients implies that there are differences in hydrocarbon biodegradation rates and variations in the microbial population. Therefore, for the present study, the differential microbial population shifts due to different inorganic nutrient contents may also explain the different biodegradation capabilities observed for biostimulation treatments with and without nutrient addition. Response of the microbial population to bioremediation of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons.At early stages (0 to 45 days) of the bioremediation process, the addition of nutrients caused significant increases in both the heterotrophic and PAH-degrading microbial populations, while soil stimulated only by aeration and optimum humidity exhibited smaller increases in the sizes of both populations and a marked delay in the increase in microbial PAH degraders (Fig. 1). This difference in behavior is consistent with the kinetics of TPH depletion observed during the early stage (Table 2). As shown in Table 2, a higher TPH degradation rate was observed for treatments to which nutrients were added. In contrast, the proportion of the PAH-degrading microbial population compared to the heterotrophic population for the treatment without nutrients increased noticeably at 21 and 45 days and reached 100% at 135 days, while lower proportions were observed for treatments with nutrients (Fig. 1). In addition, at the end of the experiment a larger PAH-degrading microbial population was observed for the treatment without nutrients. Thus, the majority presence of microbial PAH degraders during the late stage could be linked to the higher TPH degradation rates observed, especially with more recalcitrant PAHs. Both changes in PAH bioavailability and enrichment of more recalcitrant PAHs could change the microbial population and the multisubstrate interactions (8, 9, 14, 22). We found 13 different genera that were related to DGGE excised bands during biostimulation of a heavily PAH-contaminated soil: Sphingomonas, Azospirillum, Roseomonas, Brevundimonas, Trojanella, Agrobacterium, Alcaligenes, Xanthomonas, Achromobacter, Sinorhizobium, Erytrobacter, Cytophaga, and Rhodococcus. During the first stage of biodegradation in the 2M treatment and the 4M treatment, the Sphingomonas and Azospirillum phylotypes (α-Proteoabacteria) were the dominant taxa (Table 4). Furthermore, the only two coincident DGGE bands for the two treatments belong to these phylotypes (B2-11 = B4-12 and B2-20 = B4-24). Therefore, taking into account that with both treatments high levels of TPH and PAH biodegradation were observed during the first 90 days, these phylotypes may be linked to the fast biodegradation observed for acenaphthene, fluorene, phenanthrene, anthracene, alkyl-phenanthrenes, fluoranthene, and pyrene. These results are consistent with those of Roling-Wilfred et al. (29) and Kasai et al. (19), who observed strong dominance of α-Proteobacteria in bacterial communities found in recently spilled oil in Nakhodka and in oil-spiked intertidal sediments after 6 days, respectively. During data analysis, a high abundance of gram-negative bacteria was observed that could have been due to the extraction bias. However, the extraction method used in this study was able to extract DNA from gram-positive bacteria, such as Rhodococcus (this study), Mycobacterium, and Bacillus laboratory strains, suggesting that gram-negative bacteria dominated the creosote-contaminated soil during the bioremediation process. Bioaugmentation assay.For the bioaugmentation treatment (treatment 6M), no differences in the rates of biodegradation of TPH and PAHs or in community structure determined by PCR-DGGE and MPN analysis were detected. In a previous study (36) we observed that the PAH-degrading capability of consortium AM (used as the inoculum in the present study) was not affected after growth in rich media. Also, this consortium contained 19 microbial components identified as Sphingomonas, Pseudomonas, Stenotrophomonas, Ochrobactrum, Alcaligenes, Pandorea, Labrys, and Fusarium (37). 