Thus, the majority presence of microbial PAH degraders during the late stage could be linked to the higher TPH degradation rates observed, especially with more recalcitrant PAHs. Both changes in PAH bioavailability and enrichment of more recalcitrant PAHs could change the microbial population and the multisubstrate interactions (8, 9, 14, 22). We found 13 different genera that were related to DGGE excised bands during biostimulation of a heavily PAH-contaminated soil: Sphingomonas, Azospirillum, Roseomonas, Brevundimonas, Trojanella, Agrobacterium, Alcaligenes, Xanthomonas, Achromobacter, Sinorhizobium, Erytrobacter, Cytophaga, and Rhodococcus. During the first stage of biodegradation in the 2M treatment and the 4M treatment, the Sphingomonas and Azospirillum phylotypes (α-Proteoabacteria) were the dominant taxa (Table 4). Furthermore, the only two coincident DGGE bands for the two treatments belong to these phylotypes (B2-11 = B4-12 and B2-20 = B4-24). Therefore, taking into account that with both treatments high levels of TPH and PAH biodegradation were observed during the first 90 days, these phylotypes may be linked to the fast biodegradation observed for acenaphthene, fluorene, phenanthrene, anthracene, alkyl-phenanthrenes, fluoranthene, and pyrene. These results are consistent with those of Roling-Wilfred et al. (29) and Kasai et al. (19), who observed strong dominance of α-Proteobacteria in bacterial communities found in recently spilled oil in Nakhodka and in oil-spiked intertidal sediments after 6 days, respectively. During data analysis, a high abundance of gram-negative bacteria was observed that could have been due to the extraction bias. However, the extraction method used in this study was able to extract DNA from gram-positive bacteria, such as Rhodococcus (this study), Mycobacterium, and Bacillus laboratory strains, suggesting that gram-negative bacteria dominated the creosote-contaminated soil during the bioremediation process. Bioaugmentation assay.For the bioaugmentation treatment (treatment 6M), no differences in the rates of biodegradation of TPH and PAHs or in community structure determined by PCR-DGGE and MPN analysis were detected. In a previous study (36) we observed that the PAH-degrading capability of consortium AM (used as the inoculum in the present study) was not affected after growth in rich media. Also, this consortium contained 19 microbial components identified as Sphingomonas, Pseudomonas, Stenotrophomonas, Ochrobactrum, Alcaligenes, Pandorea, Labrys, and Fusarium (37). As shown in Fig. 5, none of the visible bands from consortium AM comigrated with bands from inoculated soil (treatment 6M), indicating that the inoculated microorganisms did not compete favorably with the indigenous bacterial community, even though they were originally from a PAH-contaminated soil (36) and the inoculum size was at least equal to (108 MPN g of soil−1), if not larger than, the indigenous population and organisms were periodically inoculated throughout the experiment (Table 1). Moreover, the microbial population structure of inoculated soil was very similar to that of the soil biostimulated with nutrients during the first 45 days, in which the maximum biodegradation rates were observed. Therefore, the indigenous population changed independent of the inoculum, indicating that the biodegradation process was probably the strongest selection factor for the shifts in the microbial population. Conclusions.This study showed that specific phylotypes of bacteria are related both to inorganic nutrient addition to the soil and to different phases of PAH degradation in a nonspiked PAH-contaminated soil, and it highlighted the importance of understanding how interspecies interactions, nutrient effects, and changes in PAH bioavailability and recalcitrance influence the degradation capability and structure of a microbial community. 