1B), only a marginal difference in hydrocarbon degradation was observed between the slow-release fertilizer treatment and the oil-treated control (P = 0.056) (Fig. 2). This appeared to be related to the slow-release fertilizer plot in block 3, in which the degradation was not obviously greater than that in the oil-treated, unfertilized control. When this plot was not included in the statistical analysis, a significant difference between the plot that received the slow-release fertilizer and oil-treated control plots was observed. Bacterial community structure in relation to treatment and block position.The plots were sampled in triplicate for bacterial community analyses on the day that the plots were set up and oil was added (day −7; 7 days before fertilizer addition), 5 and 2 days before first fertilizer addition (zero time), and 1, 5, 11, 80, 101, and 315 days after fertilizer treatment started. Bacterial community profiles were determined by DGGE analysis of 16S rRNA gene fragments amplified from nucleic acid extracts. The reproducibility of DNA extraction and PCR-DGGE was extensively tested with 13 pairwise comparisons of replicate samples from control plots that received no oil or fertilizer treatment; samples from different time points and blocks were examined. Similarities between replicate DGGE fingerprints were calculated by using the following two coefficients: SD, which indicated similarities based on the absence or presence of bands; and r, which compared the whole-track densitometric curve information for the DGGE fingerprints and was independent of band assignment. These two coefficients were complementary and resulted in optimal separation between DGGE fingerprints (22). The levels of reproducibility were 0.983 ± 0.016 (SD) and 0.929 ± 0.025 (r). The lower 95% limits of confidence correspond to similarity values of 0.933 and 0.872, respectively (see Materials and Methods for the method of calculation). Matrices containing similarity coefficients for 16S rRNA gene-based DGGE profiles for a particular sampling event were statistically evaluated (see Materials and Methods) in order to determine significant variation within a plot, between plots that received the same treatment, or between different treatments on a particular day, depending on which samples were compared. The data from these statistical analyses are summarized in Table 1. The within-plot variation was in most cases not significant; the exceptions were plots treated with slow-release fertilizer and the liquid fertilizer-treated plot in block 3 on several sampling occasions. An example of significantly different DGGE profiles (r = 0.777 ± 0.012), corresponding to three samples taken independently from the same plot, is shown in lanes 1a to 1c of Fig. 3A, while lanes 2a to 2c contained samples from another plot that did not show significant differences (r = 0.959 ± 0.023). Significant differences in community structure were never detected between non-oil-treated and oil-treated control plots (Table 1), and on most occasions (88% of the cases [n = 15] based on SD and 73% of the cases based on r) differences were not apparent between oil-treated control plots and liquid fertilizer-treated plots (Table 1). Principal-component analysis also did not result in separation of these samples into different groups (data not shown). Only for samples taken 5 days after fertilizer treatment was a small but significant difference observed in the bacterial community profiles between oil-treated control plots and the liquid fertilizer-treated oil-treated plots in blocks 1 and 2 based on a comparison of whole densitometric curve data (r = 0.834 ± 0.072). However, when these samples were analyzed based solely on the presence or absence of bands, no significant differences were observed (SD = 0.966 ± 0.029). Also on day 5, very clear differences in community structure were observed between the liquid fertilizer-treated replicates and the control plots in block 3 (r = 0.400 ± 0.126). This is clear from a comparison of lanes 1a to 1c (samples from liquid fertilizer-treated plot in block 3) with lanes 2a to 2c (samples from oil-treated control plot in block 3) in Fig. 3A. The bacterial community structure in this plot was also significantly different from that in the control plot 1 day after fertilization (r = 0.654 ± 0.111). It is interesting that only the liquid fertilizer-treated plot in block 3 showed obvious differences in bacterial community structure compared to the untreated and oil-treated controls (Table 1). This is consistent with the observation that liquid fertilizer treatment stimulated carbon dioxide production only in block 3 (Fig. 1). In contrast to treatment with oil alone and treatment with oil plus liquid fertilizer, rapid changes in community structure were observed following treatment with slow-release fertilizer, and the changes were long lasting (Table 1). For the plots treated with slow-release fertilizer it was only in samples from block 1 that the bacterial community structure was similar to that in non-oil-treated plots by day 315. 