The aquifer, composed of alternating eolian sands and glacial outwash material, averages 21 m thick and is highly permeable, with a hydraulic conductivity of approximately 30 m/day and a groundwater velocity of 0.1 to 0.3 m/day (15, 45). The water table at the sampling site is approximately 5.2 m below ground surface, fluctuating 0.3 to 1 m annually, and the groundwater temperature is nearly constant at 10 to 12°C. A number of organic acids have been detected at this site (3), providing evidence, along with stabilization of the plume and depletion of electron acceptors in the plume relative to the uncontaminated aquifer, for the occurrence of intrinsic bioremediation. The general view of the course of intrinsic bioremediation of a hydrocarbon-contaminated aquifer is stepwise microbial utilization of electron acceptors, with sequential utilization of the electron acceptors that provide the most potential energy upon concomitant oxidation of the hydrocarbon. Thus, oxygen is utilized first, and then nitrate, bioavailable ferric iron, and sulfate are utilized. After sulfate is depleted, methanogenesis is thought to be the final mode of carbon cycling (5). Recent studies have shown, however, that sulfate reduction and methanogenesis may take place concurrently (32). Also, aquifer heterogeneity and influx of electron acceptors, such as nitrate and sulfate, from rainwater complicate the picture of redox zone distribution. To describe the microbial constituents of the Wurtsmith aquifer, we conducted a molecular phylogenetic survey of the main redox zones. The dominant redox processes in the three zones analyzed were proposed, on the basis of geochemical characterization, to be methanogenesis, methanogenesis-sulfate reduction, and iron or sulfate reduction. Small-subunit (16S or 18S) rDNAs were amplified by PCR from DNA extracts of core sections from these three zones, and clone libraries were prepared from the PCR products for sequencing. We identified metabolically important members of the community by phylogenetic comparison with cultivated organisms and developed the hypothesis that carbon flow in this environment occurs predominantly through aceticlastic methanogenesis. Sample collection.An extensive geochemical characterization of the FT-2-associated plume can be found elsewhere (14,45). Both soil sample collection and groundwater sample collection and analysis were conducted during the week of 15 to 21 October 1996. Groundwater chemistry was determined with water extracted from multilevel well ML3, approximately 100 m downgradient from the FT-2 source, with sampling ports at the depths indicated in Fig. 1. Soil samples were collected with a Geoprobe hydraulic punch 10 m downgradient from ML3. Cores were brought to the surface, capped, placed in a nitrogen-filled glove bag for subsampling, and frozen after subsampling. Although cores were processed as aseptically as possible, the exterior of the cores was presumed to be contaminated, and samples for analysis were taken from the interior of the cores. The three cores analyzed in this study, CH, S, and Fe, were taken from approximately 6.1, 7.3, and 9.2 m below the ground surface, respectively (Fig. 1). The redox geochemistry of these cores was inferred from the chemistry of the groundwater from ML3. Core CH appeared to be methanogenic, core S appeared to be from the transition region between the sulfate-reducing and methanogenic zones, and core Fe appeared to be from a region in the aquifer where both sulfate reduction and iron reduction were occurring. DNA extraction.Community nucleic acids were extracted from sediment samples by use of a bead beating protocol based on that of Barns et al. (4). Briefly, 0.5 to 1.0 g of sediment was resuspended in modified 2× buffer A (200 mM Tris [pH 8.0], 50 mM EDTA, 200 mM NaCl, 2 mM sodium citrate, 10 mM CaCl2)–pyrophosphate (0.2%)–poly(A) (200 μg/ml)–lysozyme (3 mg/ml) in a 2-ml screw-cap tube and incubated for 40 min at 37°C. Proteinase K (to 1.2 mg/ml) and sodium dodecyl sulfate (to 0.3% [wt/vol]) were added, and the mixture was incubated for 30 min at 50°C. Samples were reciprocated on a Mini-Beadbeater (Biospec) at low speed for 2 min in the presence of 50% (vol/vol) phenol-chloroform-isoamyl alcohol (24:24:1), 5% (wt/vol) sodium dodecyl sulfate, and approximately 0.3 g of acid-washed zirconium-silica beads (0.1 mm diameter). Lysates were extracted with phenol-chloroform. 