2001; Fahy et al. 2005, 2006). Generally, toluene, ethylbenzene and xylene concentrations were about 20 times lower than that of benzene, with the notable exception of well VP13i in which toluene was the main contaminant. The concentrations of n-alkanes and PAHs were around 1000-fold lower than that of benzene (Table 1), and so were not considered in this study. Benzene was the main carbon and energy source (and stressor) in the groundwaters being studied, and therefore primarily responsible for affecting the microbial community composition, particularly in those groundwaters investigated by clone-library analysis. Benzene biodegradation Added benzene was metabolized to below detection level (1 μg l−1) in 10 of the 12 groundwater sample microcosms incubated aerobically (Fig. 2). Rapid degradation was observed in several samples characterized by either very low in situ oxygen concentrations (wells 309d, 309s and 308i), or no measurable benzene contamination prior to spiking (W18s) (Fig. 2; Table 1). By contrast, slow degradation occurred in the most polluted and oxygen-limited samples (DW3d and W18i). Partial degradation occurred in groundwater W18i over the 15 month incubation period (data not shown), while no degradation was registered in the highly alkaline groundwater, W18d (Fig. 2). No degradation was observed in groundwater microcosms incubated under anaerobic conditions for 537 days, even after the addition of nutrients (NH4Cl to a final concentration of 3 g l−1 and KH2PO4 to a final concentration of 5 g l−1) and electron acceptors added separately (nitrate, sulfate and iron) at day 240. Independent experiments to enrich methanogens also resulted in no growth (data not shown). In order to gain further insights into these laboratory observations in which 11 out of 12 groundwater microcosms degraded benzene aerobically while none degraded it anaerobically, we examined historical groundwater data detailing potential terminal electron acceptors and products of anaerobic metabolism (Jones et al. 2001), and selected four groundwater samples (summarized in Table 2) for 16S rRNA gene microbial community analysis. Groundwater sample W18d was chosen because of its high pH of 12·1, the presence of relatively high oxygen concentrations in situ, and the lack of degradation under both aerobic and anaerobic conditions. Sample W18i, which overlies groundwater W18d by 8 m, was the most benzene-contaminated groundwater, contained no detectable oxygen, but had the capacity to degrade benzene aerobically. Groundwater 309d was located in the deeper sandstone aquifer, whereas all the other samples were from unconsolidated sand and gravel overlying the clay aquitard. It had a very low oxygen concentration in situ (0·02 mg l−1) but supported rapid and complete aerobic degradation of added benzene; it also had a high concentration of methane (22·8 mg l−1) (Table 2). A similarly high level of methane was seen in groundwater DW3d, and the potential intermediate of anaerobic benzene degradation, phenol, was also detected (Table 2). 16S rRNA gene PCR amplicons were obtained from all four samples using bacterial primers, and the main phylogenetic groups are summarized in Fig. 3. Archaeal primers however only yielded amplicons from samples DW3d and 309d. These amplicons had sequences of methanogens, reflecting the fact that both of these groundwaters had high methane concentrations (Table 2). In groundwater DW3d, a total of 20 archaeal clones (AM491928-35) out of 27 formed a distinct cluster within the Methanosaetaceae (Fig. 4). The cloned sequences were generally 95–98% similar to their closest cultivated relative Methanosaeta concilii, however all were more similar to non-cultured organisms (e.g. from oil-contaminated groundwater or from a consortium capable of trichlorobenzene degradation). 