Real-Time PCR Assay Validation. At the time the alkB primers were designed, there were only 20 sequences for the alkane monooxygenase gene available in Genbank. Even with this small number it was obvious that the sequences were divergent and finding a suitable region where primers could be placed approximately 100 bp apart (optimal for real-time PCR) was difficult. For this reason, some degenerate bases were incorporated in the primers and this set was used to create a clone library that allowed us to then design primers that would be specific for our site. The clone library constructed with the degenerate primer set demonstrates that these primers are specific for the alkane monooxygenase gene alkB. The non-alkB sequences obtained did not return any significant similarities from BLAST searches in GenBank. The presence of these sequences may be attributable to the fact that the system used (TOPO-TA from Invitrogen) recommended not purifying the PCR product prior to the ligation step. The Tm of the product of interest in both assays was identified by correlating the size of the fragment on 2% agarose gels with single peaks in melt curves. A peak was observed in the melt curves from both the alkB and rpoB gene assays that was identified as primer dimer. This is a particular problem when using the SYBRGreen chemistry as the SybrGreen dye produces a signal from any doublestranded DNA, which can result in false positives or elevated readings. To prevent the formation of the secondary product with a higher Tm, the denaturing temperature during the cycling steps was changed to 84-C or 88-C. This temperature was still high enough to denature the product with the lower Tm but not the secondary product (primer dimer) with the higher Tm, thereby preventing it from being amplified. Another peak at 72-C appeared in the negative controls (Fig. 1B) resulting in a high signal for the negative controls. As suggested in the Quantitect SYBRGreen PCR Handbook (Qiagen), by adding a 15-s acquiring signal step at a higher temperature at which the primer dimer has denatured (77-C in this case), the signal due to primer dimer was removed as SYBRgreen does not bind to denatured DNA. Variations of approximately 3-C in the Tm were observed for different samples in the alkB gene assay (Fig. 1D). The theoretical Tm were calculated for a range of sequences from GenBank (Table 1) and varied by 12-C. A similar phenomenon was observed by Stubner [24], who concluded that the diversity of sequences present in their samples resulted in melt curves with broad flat peaks unlike the melt curves from the standards, which had a single, sharp peak. The limit of detection for the two assays described here was defined in different ways. Although the rpoB gene standard curve was linear to 1880 copies mL–1, the negative control often had close to 5 103 copies mL–1 (Fig. 1C). As our samples always contained over 1 106 copies mL–1, this was not significant. However, we defined the lower limit of detection as three times the standard deviation of the negative control taken over four different runs (2.7 103 ), which resulted in the lower limit for reliable quantification of the amount of rpoB genes in a sample as 1 104 copies mL–1. Other studies have also reported signal in the negative control (e.g., [9]). We observed that the alkB standard curve was linear down to 3 copies of alkB mL–1, but at this level adhesion of DNA to tubes is likely to be a problem. When serial dilutions of samples were run alongside a standard curve, it was observed that the dilutions of the samples were not linear below 200–300 copies mL–1 (data not shown). For this reason, we would suggest that the lower limit for reliable quantification for alkB is 300 copies mL–1. This is similar to other studies that have reported detection limits of around 100 copies per PCR reaction [9, 17]. The CV values from this study (based on concentrations rather than CT values) compare well to those calculated by Dionisi et al. 