The major PLFA components of strain YT-2 (Fig.2D) contained 85% of the total 13C enrichment in soil PLFA after incubation with [13C]toluene (Fig. 2C). The three additional highly 13C-labeled PLFA, all with retention times longer than that of 10me18:0, may correspond to trace PLFA components in strain YT-2 but have not yet been identified. The period in which 13C enrichment in soil PLFA occurred was the same period during which [13C]toluene disappeared from the soil microcosms (Fig. 4). Based on the pattern of PLFA enriched in toluene degradation experiments and PLFA present in strain YT-2, we hypothesize that the microorganisms actively degrading toluene in Yolo silt loam were either strain YT-2 or related high-G+C-content, gram-positive strains with very similar PLFA compositions. PLFA with midchain branching (10me-) are narrowly distributed among bacteria and are characteristic of a subset of high-G+C-content, gram-positive bacteria that includesRhodococcus and other nocardioform and filamentous actinomycetes (4, 17). PLFA with midchain branching are also found in certain gram-negative, anaerobic, sulfate-reducing proteobacteria typified by the genus Desulfobacter(16). However, sulfate-reducing bacteria are unlikely to have been active under the oxic conditions of our incubations. PLFA with midchain branching have not been identified in other bacterial groups or in archaeal or eucaryal domains. Well-studied bacterial toluene degraders, such as Pseudomonas and related genera, have PLFA compositions characterized by cyclopropyl (cy17:0 and cy19:0) and straight-chain fatty acids of even chain length (16:1 and 18:1), and do not contain methyl-branched PLFA (28). Cyclopropyl and straight-chain fatty acids of even chain length are common in soils but were not enriched in our experiments, with the exception of specific fatty acids also identified in strain YT-2 (16:1ω6 and 18:1ω9c). Terminally branched, odd-chain PLFA (a/i15:0, a/i17:0) are also common in soils and in diverse bacterial groups, including many gram-negative and gram-positive lineages (28). Terminally branched, odd-chain PLFA were not enriched in our experiments (Fig. 2). In addition, polyunsaturated PLFA, biomarkers for eukaryotes such as fungi (14), either decreased (18:2ω6,9), showed no changes (20:2ω6,9), or were not detected in our analyses. Our study showed that coupling 13C tracer analysis with PLFA analysis was a very effective technique for distinguishing the particular microbial population involved in metabolism of the labeled substrate. Given that toluene degradation is widespread among multiple prokaryotic lineages as well as some fungal strains, it was surprising that only a small subset of PLFA associated with a single bacterial population became labeled with 13C following incubation with [13C]toluene. It is possible that under other environmental conditions, e.g., higher or lower initial toluene concentrations or different moisture or temperature regimes, other populations in Yolo silt loam might become involved in toluene degradation. Experiments performed under a variety of incubation conditions will explore whether this soil has a greater diversity of toluene-degrading populations than those we measured under our experimental conditions. In summary, PLFA analysis showed that the addition of small (micromolar) amounts of a specific carbon and energy source, such as toluene, can cause a rapid and dramatic shift in the population structure of a highly complex soil microbial community. The application of 13C-PLFA tracer analysis supported the idea that this community shift is due in part to the growth of a population of toluene-degrading bacteria. These PLFA data are consistent with MPN determinations (22) and kinetic model calculations (9), indicating that toluene-degrading microbial populations in Yolo silt loam increase substantially with exposure to 20 μg of toluene ml−1. Future studies will evaluate the feasibility of using biomarker lipids to estimate the densities of biodegrading populations to calibrate or validate biodegradation kinetic models. 