1998) and hence, it is important to determine how soil type affects community-level response. Three different soils were chosen to represent three different environmental matrices and initial microbial communities. The soils were all of similar texture (sandy loam or loamy sand) and pH, so there were no gross effects caused by large differences in particle size distribution or pH. Two community-level techniques were selected to monitor the progress of bioremediation. Biolog plates are designed for identification of isolates of bacteria of clinical importance. Each well of a microtitre plate contains a different carbon source, together with a redox dye for indicating bacterial activity. A bacterial suspension is inoculated into every well on the plate, incubated, and the absorbance in each well read, giving a metabolic profile of the organism under test (Bochner 1989). Biolog plates were first employed to produce community-level physiological profiles (CLPPs) by Garland and Mills (1991), who inoculated an entire bacterial community, rather than single isolates, and analysed the resulting data using multivariate methods. Sole carbon source utilization profiling of microbial communities using the Biolog system is likely to be particularly sensitive to changes caused by addition of carbon, such as diesel oil, as this will result in the enrichment of fast-growing culturable bacteria (Kozdrój and Van Elsas 2000). In addition to the standard GN plates, a set of carbon sources relevant to hydrocarbon degradation was used in order to determine whether this would improve the sensitivity or selectivity of the sole carbon source utilization profiling. Previous work has shown that addition of ecologically-relevant carbon sources to Biolog GN sources can improve the discrimination between microbial communities (Campbell et al. 1997). Secondly, phospholipid fatty acid (PLFA) profiling of the microbial community using phospholipids extracted directly from the soil is a well characterized technique for providing information on the microbial community structure that is not based on culturing of microbes (Tunlid and White 1992; Zelles 1999). The aim of the experiment was to test the hypothesis that diesel contamination would alter the microbial community of three different soils, such that they would become more similar by selecting for a limited community of fast-growing hydrocarbon degraders. A secondary hypothesis was that sole carbon source utilization profiling using Biolog plates would be particularly sensitive to oil contamination, and that the use of ecologically-relevant carbon sources would improve the performance of the Biolog approach. Approximately 60 g wet weight of soil was placed without packing into a 250 ml soil jar and the jar sealed with stretched Parafilm. The jars were incubated at 25°C in the dark. Triplicate microcosms were destructively sampled at each time point. There were four sampling dates, hence 72 microcosms in total were used. Microcosms were arranged in a random order, and rearranged every 2–3 weeks throughout the duration of the experiment. Sampling dates were after 1, 27, 62 and 103 days. Upon sampling, the soil within each jar was mixed and portions of soil were then used for: Biolog CLPP (10 g soil), PLFA analysis (10 g), respiration and water content (20 g), pH (5 g), and TPH (total petroleum hydrocarbons; 10 g). Diesel and soil properties Standard commercial-grade diesel was purchased from a local supplier and used without modification. All soil samples were taken from grassland sites with no known history of petroleum product contamination. A single large core was collected for each soil type from the A horizon, not including the surface litter layer. Field-moist soil was sieved to a diameter of 5 mm through a stainless steel sieve and stored at 4°C until use. Soils and soil characteristics are listed in Table 1 and were measured using standard techniques. Moist soil, at approximately 40% of water holding capacity (WHC), was contaminated by manual mixing with the diesel. The soil was spread evenly and thinly in a large glass dish; the oil was poured evenly over the surface, then mixed with a stainless steel spatula for 5 min. 