Methods and Results: Three different soils were amended with diesel and bioremediation treatment simulated by addition of nutrients. The progress of bioremediation, and the effect on the indigenous microbial communities, was monitored using microbiological techniques. These included basal respiration, sole carbon source utilization patterns using both a commercially-available substrate set and a set designed to highlight changes in hydrocarbon-utilizing bacteria, and phospholipid fatty acid (PLFA) profiling. The development of active hydrocarbon-degrading communities was indicated by the disappearance of diesel, increases in soil respiration and biomass, and large changes in the sole carbon source utilization patterns and PLFA profiles compared with control soils. However, comparison of the relative community structure of the three soils using PLFA profiling showed that there was no tendency for the community structure of the three different soil types to converge as a result of contamination. In fact, they became more dissimilar as a result. Changes in the sole carbon source utilization patterns using the commercially-available set of carbon sources indicated the same result as shown by PLFA profiling. The specially selected set of carbon sources yielded no additional information compared with the commercially-available set. Significance and Impact of the Study: The results suggest that different soils have different inherent microbial potential to degrade hydrocarbons, a finding that should be taken into account in impact and risk assessments. Following the development of the microbial community and its recovery is a useful and sensitive way of monitoring the impact and recovery of oil-contaminated soils. Contamination of soil by oil spills is a widespread environmental problem that often requires clean-up of the contaminated site (Whittaker et al. 1995). Bioremediation, the removal of hydrocarbons through microbial degradation, is a commonly used approach for decontaminating oil-polluted soils. It has often been recorded that the addition of hydrocarbon-degrading microbes is no more effective at hydrocarbon removal than is stimulating the growth of the indigenous microbiota (Atlas and Atlas 1991; Atlas and Cerniglia 1995), and may even be less effective (Radwan et al. 1997). Consequently, understanding the microbial ecology and the constraints on biodegradation of an oil-contaminated site is extremely important (Holden and Firestone 1997). A central question is therefore what is the impact of oil pollution on microbial populations. Contamination by oil is generally expected to reduce the biodiversity of the soil microbiota (Atlas et al. 1991). A probable explanation for this is that the addition of large amounts of hydrocarbons selects for a limited number of fast-growing hydrocarbon degraders, which are enriched in the (typically oligotrophic) soil environment under these conditions. However, there is a lack of information on how this may be modulated by differing complex environmental matrices, and in particular, how different soil types may affect the development of hydrocarbon-degrading populations. Previous microcosm studies examining the effect of oil contamination on soil microbial communities have focused on a single soil type (e.g. Engelen et al. 1998; Macnaughton et al. 1999). Wünsche et al. (1995) compared hydrocarbon contamination in two different soil types. However, as one was an historically contaminated refinery soil and one was a contaminated pristine arable soil, it was not possible to separate the effects of soil type and differing oil treatment. It has been shown that even a simple measure of microbial response to oil contamination, such as a toxicity bioassay, gives different responses in different soil types (Marwood et al. 