However, little is known about the degradation pathways in bacteria that are difficult to culture in the laboratory. By functionally screening a metagenomic library created from activated sludge, we had earlier identified 91 fosmid clones carrying genes for extradiol dioxygenase (EDO), a key enzyme in the degradation of aromatic compounds. In this study, we analyzed 38 of these fosmids for the presence and organization of novel genes for aromatics degradation. Only two of the metagenomic clones contained complete degradation pathways similar to those found in known aromatic compound-utilizing bacteria. The rest of the clones contained only subsets of the pathway genes, with novel gene arrangements. A circular 36.7-kb DNA form was assembled from the sequences of clones carrying genes belonging to a novel EDO subfamily. This plasmid-like DNA form, designated pSKYE1, possessed genes for DNA replication and stable maintenance as well as a small set of genes for phenol degradation; the encoded enzymes, phenol hydroxylase and EDO, are capable of the detoxification of aromatic compounds. This gene set was found in 20 of the 38 analyzed clones, suggesting that this ‘detoxification apparatus’ may be widespread in the environment. The ability to use various aromatic compounds to serve as sources of carbon and energy is widespread in bacteria, and in the natural environment these bacteria contribute greatly to the breakdown of aromatic compounds and to the global carbon cycle (Wittich, 1998; Esteve-Núñez et al., 2001; Furukawa et al., 2004). The majority of reported bacterial aromatic degradation processes are aerobic (Gibson and Harwood, 2002) and comprise series of enzymes that are usually categorized as either ‘upper’- or ‘lower’-pathway enzymes (Williams and Sayers, 1994). Generally, the enzymes in the upper pathway transform aromatic compounds to aromatic vicinal diols. This initial hydroxylation step is performed by a monoxygenase or dioxygenase that incorporates an oxygen atom(s) into the aromatic ring (Gibson and Parales, 2000). The second enzyme in the upper pathway is dihydrodiol dehydrogenase, which catalyzes the conversion of dihydrodiol to dihydroxy compound. In the lower pathway, the resulting dihydroxylated aromatic compounds are transformed into ring-cleavage products by either extradiol dioxygenases (EDOs) or intradiol dioxygenases. The subsequent metabolic steps are referred to as meta- or ortho- pathways. Of these dioxygenases, EDOs can easily be identified due to their yellow pigmentation of the products and have been extensively studied (Eltis and Bolin, 1996). The ring-cleavage products are further degraded into compounds that can enter the tricarboxylic acid cycle. The genes encoding upper- and lower-pathway enzymes are often clustered into operons, and the varied combinations of upper and lower pathways provide diverse functions. Point mutations in conjunction with various gene rearrangements (for example, insertion, deletion, duplication and inversion) further promote the functional diversity of genes and gene clusters (van der Meer et al., 1992). The presence of foreign compounds can lead to the selection of mutant bacteria that are capable of metabolizing them. Aromatic catabolism genes are often harbored by mobile genetic elements (for example, plasmids, transposons and integrative and conjugative elements) that effectively disseminate the catabolic traits to phylogenetically diverse bacteria (Tsuda et al., 1999; Top and Springael, 2003; Nojiri et al., 2004). However, because the generalizations described above come only from studies of those bacteria that can be cultivated under standard laboratory conditions, they are probably biased. As the vast majority (>99%) of bacteria in the natural environment are difficult to culture in the laboratory, and are thought to differ greatly from known cultured ones (Amann et al., 1995), the not-yet cultivated bacteria may possess novel genes, enzymes or pathways. In addition, the aromatic compound-degrading bacteria thus far analyzed were isolated on the basis of their ability to utilize aromatics as their sole carbon and energy sources. This approach can isolate only those bacteria that possess all of the genes necessary to completely degrade aromatic compounds. Efforts have been made to directly obtain genes and pathways for aromatics catabolism using methods independent of bacterial culture (Galvao et al., 2005; Mohn et al., 2006). For example, Junca and Pieper (2004) and Sipilä et al. (2008) relied on a PCR-based approach to assess the diversity of EDO genes in the environment. However, these sequence-driven approaches still suffer from bias, in this case from the primer sequences selected for PCR. 