Different conditions result in differential expression of community members. Enrichment under identical conditions leads to development of similar community compositions, irrespective of contamination history (Fig. 2and 3). These results are similar to those of Shi et al. (14), who demonstrated that similar microbial communities developed in soils exposed to toluene regardless of whether the soils were initially contaminated. The soil environment targeted in our study supports a variety of different culturable bacteria. The ability to degrade aromatic hydrocarbons is widely distributed in this community, and the community includes γ-proteobacteria (Pseudomonas spp. ), β-proteobacteria (Alcaligenes spp. ), α-proteobacteria (Sphingomonas spp. ), high-G+C-content gram-positive bacteria, such as actinobacteria (Rhodococcus spp. ) and Microbacterium, and low-G+C-content gram-positive bacteria (Bacillus spp. ). We used RSGP rather than rRNA-targeted probes to monitor the dynamics of this community. The main advantage of this technique is that multiple cultured bacteria can be tracked in a single hybridization step. This has not been accomplished yet with rRNA targeted probes. Some disadvantages of the technique are the fact that the microbial community is described solely in terms of its culturable component, although this is likely to be a significant fraction of the total bacteria in enrichment cultures, the fact that genomically similar microorganisms cannot be distinguished, and the fact that calculated fx values contain cross-hybridization contributions for which we cannot correct (19,20). Despite these shortcomings, the RSGP method demonstrated that enrichments from contaminated and uncontaminated soils from the same site developed along similar paths when they were exposed to similar conditions. The samples were initially dominated by γ-proteobacteria (Pseudomonas spp. ) but converged to a community dominated by β-proteobacteria (Alcaligenes andBordetella spp. ), as shown in Fig. 2 and 3. The reasons for the observed succession are not clear. In our experimental system the supply of C5+ was continuous at a constant concentration, whereas other required nutrients were replenished every 2 weeks when the culture was transferred. The increases and decreases in some of the early major community components (for instance, standard 11 [Pseudomonas syringae LQ 20]) may be related to the gradual removal of soil from the enrichment. Spills of C5+ have occurred occasionally at the ethylene plant site investigated, leading to exposure of microbial communities to nearly pure C5+ at the center of the spill and to lower C5+ concentrations away from the center of the spill. We demonstrated that communities derived from an uncontaminated location where a new ethylene plant is under construction can develop the ability to degrade most C5+ hydrocarbons, which is important for the plant operators in view of the potential for accidental contamination of this location. Benzene, toluene, and xylene are major constituents of C5+. Degradation of mixtures of BTEX compounds has been investigated by numerous authors. Oh et al. 