Samples from a contaminated soil pile that was constructed for a bioremediation project (16) and has been described previously (4, 13) were used for isolation of master filter organisms. Isolation and characterization of C5+-degrading bacteria.The single C5+ components benzene, styrene, xylenes (a mixture ofo-, m-, and p-xylenes), and naphthalene were used as sole carbon and energy sources for isolation of strains. Appropriate dilutions of suspensions or enrichments of contaminated soil samples were spread on minimal salts medium (MSM) agar plates (13). These preparations were incubated at room temperature in desiccators containing specific hydrocarbon substrates at a concentration of 1 or 10% (wt/wt) in vacuum pump oil (vpo), which provided a constant concentration of each hydrocarbon substrate for microbial growth (4). Pure cultures were obtained by successive culturing of colonies picked from these plates on MSM. Purity was checked by plating colonies on rich tryptone-yeast extract (TY) agar (21). Pure cultures were stored as glycerol stocks at −70°C. The genomic relatedness of the cultures was determined by dot blot assays. Chromosomal DNA of a given isolate was labeled by the random hexamer procedure using [α-32P]dCTP and was used to probe a dot blot preparation containing known amounts of denatured genomic DNAs of all isolated strains, as well as a master filter containing denatured genomic DNAs of 41 standards isolated previously (Table 1, standards 1 to 41). The dot blot assay was repeated for all newly obtained isolates. Genomically distinct isolates were characterized by partial 16S rRNA gene sequencing of PCR products obtained with primers f10 (11) and r1406 (3), as described previously (13, 19). The 16S rRNA sequences were compared to nucleotide sequences obtained from GenBank by using the advanced basic local alignment search tool (BLASTN) and to nucleotide sequences obtained from the Ribosomal Database Project (RDP) by using the SIMILARITY_RANK tool (7). Community analysis of soil enrichment cultures on C5+.Aerobic enrichment cultures were started with 2 g of soil and 10 ml of MSM in test tubes (2 by 15 cm) that were closed with loosely fitting metal caps to allow exchange of gases and hydrocarbon vapor. These tubes were incubated in a desiccator equilibrated with 1% synthetic C5+ (148.5 g of vpo and 1.5 g of a mixture containing 56% benzene, 25% DCPD, 7.5% toluene, 4% styrene, 4%m-xylene, and 4% naphthalene). The cultures were transferred every second or third week by using 10% inocula. Following two transfers the medium was changed to B+NP medium (2) because this medium provided trace elements which were considered necessary in the absence of soil. At the time of each transfer, plate counts were obtained by using 0.25× Luria-Bertani agar (12); the remainder of the culture was used for isolation of total community DNA for RSGP analysis. DNA was isolated by a modified procedure of Marmur (8), as described by Shen et al. (13). Humic acids were removed with Sepharose 4B spin columns (5). For RSGP analysis 100 ng of total community DNA was combined with 0.1 ng of bacteriophage λ DNA, which served as an internal standard. Following random hexamer labeling with [α-32P]dCTP, the probe was hybridized with a master filter containing known amounts (typically 100 ng) of the denatured genomic DNAs of all 55 standards (Table 1). Following washing and drying the filters were exposed to a BASIII imaging plate. Images were analyzed with a Fuji BAS1000 bioimaging analyzer (13, 19). Calculated fx values (20) for all 55 standards were normalized by setting the Σfx value at 1. Dendrograms were generated with the cluster analysis program SYSTAT. Hydrocarbon degradation kinetics.The kinetics of C5+ degradation were studied with enrichment cultures and synthetic consortia. Triplicate enrichment cultures were maintained by biweekly transfer for 23 weeks by inoculating 2 ml of each enrichment into 8 ml of B+NP medium. Following 2 weeks of growth in a desiccator equilibrated with a 1% C5+ atmosphere, the cells were harvested by centrifugation and then washed twice with and resuspended in 3.5 ml of B+NP medium. 