1). At the beginning of 2002, a detailed study of the site pollution and local hydrogeology was performed, revealing more than 7000 kg of low density non-aqueous phase liquids (LNAPL) affecting the groundwater and slowly flowing towards a main river close to the factory, as well as 3000 kg of hydrocarbons firmly sorbed in the vadose zone covering a total surface area of around 2 ha. The different boreholes drilled enabled three contaminant plumes and a fourth area to be located that corresponded with mixtures of the three contaminants. Therefore, four zones were delimited (Fig. 1): Z1 for the fuel-oil spilled from a heating system; Z2 for the lubricant-oil leaked from metal-working units; Z3 for diesel fuel spilled from underground tanks; and Z4 for a perimeter with mixtures of the three contaminants. In addition, hydrogeological studies detected water tables ranging from 3 m in the areas closest to the river up to 6 m in the areas furthest away. Finally, the data obtained from the boreholes and geophysical studies revealed that the heterogeneous characteristics of the subsoil mainly comprised of complex mixtures of alluvial sediments, loams, clay, and dolomite, combined with anthropic fillers (slag and building waste). Remediation works started with physico-chemical techniques that included the installation of a hydraulic barrier to keep groundwater from being discharged into the river, as well as the implementation of a “pump and treat” system to remove free phases of hydrocarbons from the polluted groundwater. After more than one year of treatment, most of the LNAPLs were removed (monthly removal of approximately 500 l of hydrocarbons). Nevertheless, some LNAPLs remained, in addition to the weathered contaminants sorbed to the soil in the unsaturated zone, which promoted periodic hydrocarbon leaching into the groundwater, depending on water table fluctuations. In the spring of 2003, monthly sampling and subsequent TPH analysis revealed decreasing efficiency of the “pump and treat” system. The analysis showed that approximately 2000 kg of hydrocarbons were being consistently retained in the unsaturated zone and in around 500 kg of free phases in the groundwater throughout the site. At that time, the soil and groundwater were studied in order to choose a suitable bioremediation strategy and to establish successive monitoring. GC–MS analysis indicated the presence of different profiles, corresponding to the three contaminant plumes previously mentioned (Fig. 2). Irrespective of the age of the spills, all the contaminants (but in particular the fuel-oil) had been affected by strong weathering (Fig. 2). The complete geochemical characterization revealed common features in all the zones studied, such as the low bioavailability of contaminants (predominantly the heavy hydrocarbons detected in the unsaturated zone) as determined by the geological nature of the subsoil previously described, and the absence of appropriate levels of nutrients and dissolved oxygen (N levels less than 1 mg/l and P less than 0.1 mg/l in most monitoring wells; average dissolved O2 levels were below 2 mg/l) for aerobic groundwater bioremediation purposes. Microbial populations with hydrocarbon-degrading metabolic abilities were also detected (see below). Therefore, a 4 month sequential treatment with proper dosages of the above mentioned products was implemented, in order to stimulate microbial activity. Soil washing (surfactant infiltration), fertilizer injection, and microbiological chemical sampling were performed in the first, second, and fourth week of each month, respectively. H2O2 injection was continuous and groundwater monitoring was carried out once a week during the entire treatment period. The treatment was initially designed to continue for up to six or eight months, but the excellent results obtained made it possible to conclude earlier than expected. For this extension, the existing pumping system was improved by digging trenches and new wells to enable the amendments (diluted hydrogen peroxide and the oleophilic fertilizer S-200) to be injected/infiltrated. Prior to these periodic injections, the surfactant Bioversal HC was infiltrated through the unsaturated zone to initially desorb as much of the hydrocarbon content remaining above the water table as possible. 3.3. Monitoring of in situ bioremediation After transitory fluctuations, amendment dosages (hydrogen peroxide, S-200, and Bioversal HC) were finally adjusted to achieve adequate levels of dissolved oxygen (5–10 mg/l, irrespective of the monitoring well) and nutrients. Average N levels of 10 mg/l and P levels of approximately 2 mg/l in the groundwater were reached during the treatment period. Wherever it was needed, the nutrient injection was decreased to avoid eutrophication. 