Additional objectives included the characterization of the predominant indigenous microorganisms before, during, and after biostimulation and the assessment of bacterial activity/viability using fluorescence techniques. The evolution of microbial populations was studied using the combination of conventional laboratory techniques such as microbial counting and selective enrichment. The diversity of pollutant-degrading microorganisms was analyzed by means of 16S rRNA gene studies [5]; [32] ; [28]. Groundwater and soil samples were collected in appropriate bottles which were sealed and stored in the dark at 4 °C. After extracting the hydrocarbon with dichloromethane (EPA Method 8015), the total petroleum hydrocarbons (TPH) content was determined in both groundwater and soil samples by gas chromatography-flame ionization detector (GC-FID). Further characterization of pollutants and control of biodegradation was performed with gas chromatography–mass spectrometry (GC–MS) techniques. For liquid samples, hydrocarbon extraction was conducted by circulation through a solid phase extraction (SPE) cartridge (EPA Method 3535) and subsequent washing with 20 ml dichloromethane. Soil samples and pure product analyses were conducted by extraction using a Soxhlet apparatus and purified by liquid chromatography (EPA Method 3540C). Both SPE and liquid chromatography extracts were injected into a gas chromatograph (GC) system HP 6890 Series equipped with a capillary column (AT5 Alltech, 25 m length and 0.25 mm internal diameter). The column oven temperature was raised from 60 °C to 300 °C at 6 °C/min and the injector temperature was set at 275 °C. This equipment was linked to a mass detector (MSD) HP 5973 Series which allowed peak area determinations in selective ion mode (SIM) using the Wiley 275 database (EPA Method 8270C). Chemical biomarker determinations (isoprenoids and hopanes) were used to evaluate biodegradation [50] ; [37]. 2.1.2. Groundwater monitoring Levels of dissolved oxygen, pH, redox potential, and conductivity were controlled weekly in the injection and monitoring wells by standard electrodes (Hanna Instruments). Nitrogen (both nitrate and ammonium) and phosphorus consumption were determined by means of spectrophotometric methods (Hach Instruments). Different microbiological methods were used in the first screening (carried out before implementation of the bioremediation intervention) and in the subsequent monitoring program during and after bioremediation. Microbial populations in the different monitoring wells of the four polluted zones were periodically monitored by conventional plate-counting using two types of growth media. The first one was a rich complex medium (CM) designed for growing most culturable chemo-organotrophic bacteria (Tryptic Soy Broth (TSB), Merck, 0.05% yeast extract, and 1.5% agar). The second one was the solid degradation medium (DM) (0.3% NH4NO3; 0.05% MgSO4·7H2O; 2% CaCl2·2H2O; 0.007% K2HPO4; 0.05% KH2PO4; 2% agar with 0.5% commercial filter-sterilized diesel as the sole carbon source) used to recover most culturable hydrocarbon degraders. Plate counts in both cases were performed as follows: an 80 ml sample of groundwater was obtained in sterile conditions and centrifuged for 10 min at 15,000 rpm; the resulting sediment was then diluted with 4 ml of sterile distilled water. Then 2 ml were taken for enrichment techniques, 1 ml for microscopic examinations and the rest for 10-fold serial dilutions that were spread over the surface of duplicate agar plates. The media were incubated at 30 °C for 48 h in the case of CM and 1 week for DM; colonies were counted to quantify the total indigenous bacterial CFU and hydrocarbon-degrader content. Enrichment techniques were conducted in DM liquid medium with the following carbon sources: 2% fuel oil; 2% lubricant oil; and 2% of diesel fuel (depending on the area from which the sample was taken). Two milliliters of the concentrated groundwater (see above) were added to 100 ml of medium and incubated in a rotary shaker at 250 rpm and 30 °C for 5 days. Two milliliters of the culture were then inoculated again in 100 ml of the same medium. This procedure was repeated three times. Sequence analysis of 16S bacterial ribosomal DNA (16S rDNA) was performed on selected isolates after DNA extraction by a commercial kit (Chemagic Bac 100 Kit, Chemagen). The 16S rDNA was amplified by PCR using the conserved eubacterial primers pA (5′-AGA GTT TGA TCC TGG CTC AG-3′) and pH (5′-AAG GAG GTG ATC CAG CCG CA-3′) [8]. The 50 μl reaction mixture contained 2 mM dNTPs mix (Amersham Biosciences), 30 pmol/μl of each primer (pA and pH), 1.5 mM MgCl2, 10× polymerase buffer, 0.2 μl Eco Taq DNA polymerase (Ecogen), and finally, the mixture was overlaid with 50 μl mineral oil. 