1992). Since the recalcitrance in this case is due to a physical limitation rather than a biological limitation, improvements in the biodegradation of apolar compounds must first be sought in increasing the bioavailability. Bioavailability enhancement of PAH by adding surfactants (Aronstein & Alexander 1993; Tiehm & Zumft 1992) or by extracting the adsorbed pollutants from soil organic matter with solvents (Weissenfels et al. 1992) has been shown to greatly improve the rate of PAH biodegradation. Biosurfactants produced by the microorganisms can also enhance the rate of biodegradation (Oberbremet et al. 1990). Intrinsic recalcitrance refers to a limitation in the biodegradative capacities of microorganisms. From an environmental biotechnology point of view, a major consideration is the metabolic capacities available in either aerobic or anaerobic microbial communities. In aerobic environments, microorganisms often utilize oxygenases to initiate an electrophilic attack on aromatic molecules. Consequently, molecules substituted with numerous electron-withdrawing substitutions such as chloro, nitro and azo groups are quite resistant to aerobic biodegradation (Knackmuss 1992; Okey & Fig. 3. Thepercentagebiodegradationofpolychlorinatedbiphenyls (PCB) in a laboratory-scale semicontinuous activated sludge reactor as a function of the chlorine content of the commercial PCB mixture (Tucker et al. 1975). The biphenyl or PCB loading was 0.333 mg/L.d in the activated sludge reactor with a steady-state sludge concentration of 2.5 g SS/L and which was acclimatized to the PCB mixtures for 5 months. Bogan 1965), as has been observed for purified dioxygenases (Dorn & Knackmuss 1978; Knackmuss 1981). In anaerobic environments where a nucleophilic mechanism of attack is common, the presence of these electron-withdrawing groups is favorable for the initial reductive attack (Bosma et al. 1988; Dolfing & Harrison 1993; Knackmuss 1992). In fact during the anaerobic biodegradation of aromatics, bacteria prepare the compounds for ring reduction by simplifying them to benzoate and finally to benzoyl-CoA (Fig. 1), a compound of high electrophilic character (Fuchs et al. 1994). On the other hand, electron-donating functional groups, such as amino groups, are troublesome for the nucleophilic attack of anaerobes (Knackmuss 1992; Schink 1988b). Also the lack of any functional groups has been a characteristic associated with the recalcitrance of hydrocarbons in anaerobic environments (Schink 1985; Schink 1988a), explaining the occurrence of simple unsaturated hydrocarbons in geologically preserved anaerobic sediments. Finally, the presence of functional groups can sometimes interfere with the activity of enzymes by creating a steric hinderance. fragments have also often been found to be troublesome for aerobic biotreatment systems although some aerobic enrichment cultures have been reported which rapidly biodegrade pentachlorophenol in continuous biofilm reactors. (1,2,3- and 1,3,5-trichloro) were shown to resist degradation in aerobic aquifer sediments, while lower mono- and dichlorinated benzenes were readily removed (Bosma et al. 1994). 1,2,3- and 1,2,4- trichlorobenzenes incubated in aerobic soil were slowly mineralized (Marinucci & Bartha 1979) and 1,2,4- trichlorobenzene was not removed in aerobic sediments even after 2 years of acclimatization (Van der Meer et al. 1987). In experiments with aerobic activated sludge grown on benzene, no respiration of 1,2,4-trichlorobenzene was observed but O2-uptake did occur when mono-chlorobenzene was tested as a substrate instead (Okey & Bogan 1965). 