1984). Likewise, cells from activated sludge could decolourize several azo dyes under anaerobic conditions (Wuhrmann et al. 1980). In a sequenced anaerobic-aerobic reactor system for the biodegradation of the azo dye, Mordant-Yellow-3, biomass recovered from the aerobic post treatment step was recycled to the anaerobic stage where the azo bond was reductively cleaved (Glaesser et al. 1992). Although it is not clear whether strict anaerobes or aerobes in the aerobic activated sludge were responsible for these reductions, the studies do clearly demonstrate that reduction of 'xenobiotic' electron withdrawing substituents is not necessarily restricted to mature anaerobic consortia. The ability of aerobic bacteria to cause anaerobic biotransformations is best illustrated in studies with isolated pure cultures. Anaerobically incubated cell free extracts ofHydrogenomonas sp. grown aerobically on diphenylmethane were able to reduce the polychlorinated aromatic hydrocarbon, DDT, to dechlorinated intermediates (Pfaender & Alexander 1972). Four studies indicated the ability of aerobically grown pure cultures of bacteria to reductively cleave a variety of azo dyes during anaerobic incubations of the harvested cells (Haug et al. 1991; Mechsner & Wuhrmann 1982; Ryan et al. 1968; Wuhrmann et al. 1980). Anaerobically incubated resting cells or cell free extracts of aerobes have been shown to hydroxylate chloro- and nitroaromatics. Aerobically grown cells of Acinetobacter sp. strain 4CB 1 and those of another bacterial isolate, strain NTB-1, could convert 4- chlorobenzoate to 4-hydroxybenzoate in the absence of elemental oxygen (Adriaens et al. 1989; Groenewegen et al. 1992). Strain NTB- 1 required nitrate for this reaction and a Coenzyme-A-thioester of 4-chlorobenzoate was shown to be involved in the reaction mechanism (Groenewegen et al. 1992). Acinetobacter sp. strain 4CB 1 could also convert 3,4-dichlorobenzoic acid to 4- carboxy- 1,2-benzoquinone in the absence of 02 (Adriaens et al. 1989). Washed cells and cell free extract of the aerobically cultivated Comamonas acidovorans sp. strain NBA-10, converted 4-nitrobenzoate to 3,4- dihydroxybenzoate under anaerobic conditions (Groenewegen & de Bont 1992). 4-Nitrobenzoate was first reduced to 4-hydroxylaminobenzoate, and this intermediate was converted to 3,4-dihydroxybenzoate by a novel enzyme. The coexistence of anaerobes and aerobes in coculture does not only require that the anaerobes are protected from O2-toxicity. The anaerobes must also be able to compete for substrate in order to survive for extended periods. Aerobic facultative heterotrophs which can utilize oxygen for respiration, can obtain higher levels of energy from the substrate and consequently are expected to grow faster than anaerobic bacteria competing for the same substrate. 