Proton and bicarbonate reduction are the primary electron acceptors utilized in methanogenic environments (Schink 1992). Phototrophic bacteria can also use aromatic compounds as carbon and electron donors in the absence of 02 if light is available. In this case, the degradation product is biomass rather than carbon dioxide (Evans & Fuchs 1988). The amount of energy that can be conserved by microorganisms in the form of ATP or an ionic gradient is dependent on the Gibbs free energy of degradation. The Gibbs free energy change resulting from the catabolism of a given aromatic compound is strongly dependent on the nature of the terminal electron acceptor. As an example, the Gibbs free energy change is given in Table 2 for the complete oxidation of benzoate to bicarbonate with different electron acceptors. The amount of energy which is available is highest under aerobic and under anaerobic nitrate-reducing and iron-reducing conditions. However, under sulfate- and sulfur-reducing conditions as well as under methanogenic conditions, comparatively less energy is available for the microorganisms. Consequently, the molar cell yields under methanogenic and sulfidogenic conditions are rather low. Energy conservation can take place during electron transport to the terminal electron acceptor at the cytoplasmic membrane. The amount of energy which becomes available when reducing equivalents (e.g. NADH) are channelled to oxygen, nitrate or Fe 3+ is high. However, when sulfate, sulfur or bicarbonate reduction are the electron acceptors, much less energy is available to drive electron transport phosphorylation (Thauer et al. 1977). The aerobic and anaerobic biotransformation of aromatic compounds has been reviewed extensively (Fuchs et al. 1994; Haggblom 1992; Marvin-Sikkema & Bont 1994; Smith 1994). In order to exemplify differences between aerobic and anaerobic biotransformations of aromatic compounds, pathways of phenol and 3-chlorobenzoate biodegradation were chosen for the sake of illustration. The pathways of aerobic and anaerobic phenol degradation are compared in Fig. 1. Aerobically, phenol is first converted to catechol, a reaction which is catalyzed by a monooxygenase. Pathways involved in the aerobic and anaerobic degradation of phenol (Fuchs et al. 1994; Rochkind-Dubinsky et al. 1987). ortho- or meta-fission to intermediates of the central metabolism. The initial ring fission reactions are catalyzed by dioxygenases. Benzoate is degraded in a similar fashion. However, in this case protocatechuate is the intermediate which is cleaved via ortho or metafission. Anaerobically, phenol is catabolized quite differently. So far, the pathways of degradation have only been elucidated in detail with denitrifying bacteria (Fuchs et al. 