Flasks and serum bottles both were inoculated into 10% (wt/vol) with oiled sands, and 0.2% (wt/vol) of sterile source oil served as the sole source carbon and electron donor. Bacterial growth was monitored by measuring the optical density at 600 nm. After four successive transfers to fresh medium, strains were isolated onto Zobell marine agar (HiMedia, India) or artificial seawater medium supplemented with 5% peptone, 1% yeast extract, 10 mM HEPES, and molecular-grade agar (Sigma-Aldrich) as a solidifying agent. Denitrifying bacteria were isolated on agar plates of the artificial seawater medium equilibrated inside a Coy anaerobic chamber with 20 mM nitrate as the sole electron acceptor (22). Repeated streaking on solid medium purified isolated strains, representative pure cultures were again screened in liquid media for oil degradation potential, and frozen stocks were prepared at −80°C in 20% glycerol. Phenotypic characterization of pure cultures.Representative isolates were further screened for oil degradation capability under aerobic conditions by quantifying the residual oil in liquid cultures using gravimetric and spectrophotometric methods (see further details in the supplemental material). Initial physiological characterization of representative oil-degrading isolates was conducted using phenotypic MicroArray (PM) analysis. PM tests were performed by Biolog, Inc. (Hayward, CA), according to methods described elsewhere (6, 44; see the supplemental material for further details). Nucleic acid extraction, DNA fingerprinting, and analysis of SSU rRNA sequences.Total genomic DNA was extracted using a MoBio Powersoil DNA extraction kit (MoBio Laboratories, Carlsbad, CA) according to the manufacturer's protocol. Bacterial community structure was initially assessed in DNA extracts by community fingerprinting using the automated ribosomal intergenic spacer analysis (ARISA) method (61). This technique allowed for the rapid comparison of a large number of samples and aided in identifying critical samples for pyrotag sequencing (see the supplemental material for a complete description of the ARISA methods). Total RNA was extracted from sand samples according to the method of Chin et al. (10). Contaminating DNA was removed using DNase I (Ambion, Austin, TX). Reverse transcription reactions for SSU rRNA were performed using GoScript reverse transcriptase (Promega, Madison, WI) and the general bacterial 1492R reverse primer at 0.2 μM (72). Reactions were conducted according to the manufacturer's instructions. For pyrotag sequencing, ∼100 ng of extracted DNA or cDNA was sent to the Research and Testing Laboratory (Lubbock, TX) for bacterial rRNA gene tag-encoded FLX amplicon pyrosequencing. PCR amplification was performed using the primers Gray28F and Gray519r (Table 1) (31), and sequencing reactions utilized a Roche 454 FLX instrument (Roche, Indianapolis, IN) with Titanium reagents, titanium procedures, a one-step PCR, and a mixture of Hot Start and HotStar high-fidelity Taq polymerases. After sequencing, all failed sequence reads and low-quality sequence ends and tags were removed, and sequences were depleted of any nonbacterial ribosome sequences and chimeras using custom software (21), as has been described previously (1). Pyrosequences were trimmed to 300 bases, and sequences shorter than 300 bases were removed from further analysis. Sequence data were submitted to the European Nucleotide Archive Sequence Read Archive under the study accession number ERP000807. Analysis of bacterial community composition.Sequence analysis was accomplished through the software packages QIIME (9) and Primer6 (Primer-E; Lutton, Ivy Bridge, United Kingdom). Sequences were clustered into operational taxonomic units by 97% sequence identity using UCLUST (17), and reference sequences were picked using scripts in QIIME. Operational taxonomic units (OTU) were classified in QIIME using the RDP classification algorithm set at a 50% confidence rating. Representative sequences were aligned using the PyNAST algorithm, and the alignment was filtered to remove common gaps. A phylogenetic tree was built de novo using FastTree (58). Jack-knifed beta diversity was assessed by iteratively rarefying samples to 1,600 sequences in order to remove the effect of sampling effort, in QIIME. The Bray-Curtis distance was calculated for each rarefied OTU abundance table, and an average pairwise distance and standard deviation were calculated for each pair of samples. The resulting distance matrix was imported into Primer6 and visualized using a nonparametric multidimensional scaling plot (NMDS). 