Seeding involves the introduction of allochthonous microorganisms into the natural environment for the purpose of increasing the rate or extent, or both, of biodegradation of pollutants. The rationale for this approach is that the autochthonous microbial populations may not be capable of degrading the wide range of potential substrates present in complex mixtures such as petroleum. The criteria to be met by effective seed organisms have been reviewed by Atlas (6) and include the ability to degrade most petroleum components, genetic stability, viability during storage, rapid growth following storage, a high degree of enzymatic activity and growth in the environment, the ability to compete with Mixed cultures have been most commonly used as inocula for seeding because of the relative ease with which microorganisms with different and complementary hydrocarbondegrading capabilities can be isolated. The potential for creating, through genetic manipulation, microbial strains able to degrade a variety of different types of hydrocarbons has been demonstrated by Friello et al. (58). They successfully produced a multiplasmid-containing Pseudomonas strain capable of oxidizing aliphatic, aromatic, terpenic, and polyaromatic hydrocarbons. The use of such a strain as an inoculum during seeding would preclude the problems associated with competition between strains in a mixed culture. However, there is considerable controversy surrounding the release of such genetically engineered microorganisms into the environment, and field testing of these organisms must therefore be delayed until the issues of safety, containment, and the potential for ecological damage are resolved (132). Seeding of petroleum-contaminated aquatic environments has been attempted, with mixed results. Tagger et al. (133) observed no increase in petroleum degradation in seawater inoculated with a mixed culture of hydrocarbon-degrading bacteria. Atlas and Busdosh (13) reported increased degradation of oil in a saline Arctic pond after inoculation with an oil-degrading Pseudomonas sp., but no improvement in a freshwater pond. Horowitz and Atlas (72) found that greater losses of oil in seawater in an open flow-through system occurred when octadecane-coated bacteria were applied 2 weeks after the addition of an oleophilic fertilizer to the system than when the fertilizer alone was added. In the same study, no significant increases in the loss of gasoline from freshwater sediment were produced by seeding. Rosenberg et al. (115) were able to demonstrate removal of residual oil from the ballast tanks of oil tankers by microbial seeding, although removal appeared to result primarily from bioemulsification rather than biodegradation. Terrestrial ecosystems differ from aquatic ecosystems in that soils contain higher concentrations of organic and inorganic matter and, generally, larger numbers of microorganisms and are more variable in terms of physical and chemical conditions (29). The microbial community of soils usually includes a significant hydrocarbon-utilizing component, which readily increases in response to hydrocarbon contamination (16, 75, 88, 106). The presence of indigenous microbial populations which are highly adapted to a particular soil environment would be expected to influence negatively the ability of seed microorganisms to compete successfully and survive; for this reason, soils are not widely considered to be amenable to improvements in rates of biodegradation though seeding alone (6, 29). Other potential problems associated with the inoculation of soils, reviewed by Goldstein et al. (61), include inadequate (i.e., extremely low) concentrations of the chemical of interest, the presence of inhibitory substances, predation, preferential metabolism of competing organic substrates, and insufficient movement of the seed organisms within the soil. Addition of selected pure cultures of bacteria to soil has been found to increase the rate of degradation of pesticides such as isopropyl N-phenylcarbamate (41), 2,4,5-trichlorophenoxyacetic acid (83), DDT (dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane) (81), and parathion (20). Similar attempts by Jobson et al. (77), Lehtomaki and Niemela (87), and Verstraete et al. (138) to enhance the biodegradation of hydrocarbons in soils were unsuccessful. The best results from seeding experiments have been reported in studies in which the environment is controlled to some extent, such as in fermentors and chemostats. The advantages of such arrangements are clear: competition with autochthonous microflora is reduced or nonexistent, and system parameters can be optimized to achieve the highest rates of biodegradation. The disadvantages are economic costs associated with equipment and equipment transport, energy input, and the impracticality of treating spills in some environments (e.g., uncontained oil slicks) in a closed or semicontained system (6). This approach has been used with some success in the biodegradation of crude oil in seawater (26) and in the in situ bioremediation of hydrocarboncontaminated soil and groundwater (139). 