(146) isolated an alga, Prototheca zopfi, which was capable of utilizing crude oil and a mixed-hydrocarbon substrate and exhibited extensive degradation of n- and isoalkanes, as well as aromatic hydrocarbons. Cerniglia et al. (38) observed that nine cyanobacteria, five green algae, one red alga, one brown alga, and two diatoms could oxidize naphthalene. Protozoa, by contrast, have not been shown to utilize hydrocarbons. Rogerson and Berger (113) found no direct utilization of crude oil by protozoa cultured on hydrocarbon-utilizing yeasts and bacteria. Overall, the limited available evidence does not appear to suggest an ecologically significant role for algae and protozoa in the degradation of hydrocarbons in the environment (29, 96). Prior exposure of a microbial community to hydrocarbons, either from anthropogenic sources such as accidental oil spills, petroleum exploration and transportation activities, and waste oil disposal, or from natural sources such as seeps and plant-derived hydrocarbons (21, 95), is important in determining how rapidly subsequent hydrocarbon inputs can be biodegraded. This phenomenon, which results from increases in the hydrocarbon-oxidizing potential of the community, is known as adaptation (128). The three interrelated mechanisms by which adaptation can occur are (i) induction and/or depression of specific enzymes, (ii) genetic changes which result in new metabolic capabilities, and (iii) selective enrichment of organisms able to transform the compound or compounds of interest (128, 129). Selective enrichment has been widely observed in studies of hydrocarbon and petroleum degradation in the environment. A large number of reports, reviewed by Colwell and Walker (44), Atlas (7), Floodgate (54), Cooney (45), and Bossert and Bartha (29), have shown that the numbers of hydrocarbon-utilizing microorganisms and their proportion in the heterotrophic community increase upon exposure to petroleum or other hydrocarbon pollutants and that the levels of hydrocarbonutilizing microorganisms generally reflect the degree of contamination of the ecosystem. In some cases, this phenomenon has been associated with the predominance of a few hydrocarbon-degrading genera (88), whereas in other studies the diversity of heterotrophic populations was shown to be unchanged (42, 69, 101, 106) or even to increase (70). The specific effect of hydrocarbon contamination on the generic composition of the microbial community would be expected to exhibit a strong dependence on the environment and local conditions, which may explain these apparently conflicting observations. Adaptation of microbial communities to hydrocarbons, i.e., increases in rates of transformation of hydrocarbons associated with oil-contaminated environments, has been reported in several studies. Walker et al. observed greater degradation of a mixed-hydrocarbon substrate (141) and South Louisiana crude oil (144) by sediment bacteria from an oil-polluted harbor than by bacteria from a relatively unpolluted environment. Uptake and mineralization rates of ['4C]hexadecane were also higher for planktonic bacteria from the polluted site (142). Similarly, Caparello and LaRock (36), in a study of mineralization of ['4C]hexadecane and degradation of n-alkane mixtures by bacteria in several surface water and sand samples, concluded that areas with greater hydrocarbon burdens had higher hydrocarbon-oxidizing activity. Herbes and Schwall (67) reported that turnover times for naphthalene, anthracene, benzo[a]anthracene, and benzo[a]pyrene were 10 to 400 times longer in sediments of a pristine freshwater stream than in petroleumcontaminated sediments. Sherrill and Sayler (123) observed increased phenanthrene-biodegradative capacity in water samples from two reservoirs receiving industrial and domestic wastes compared with a reservoir not receiving wastes. Wyndham and Costerton (155) concluded that sediment microbial populations within the Athabasca oil sands were more capable of oxidizing hydrocarbons than were populations from control sites, based on respiration rates of radiolabeled hexadecane and naphthalene. Sayler et al. (117) showed that exposure of freshwater sediments to a synthetic oil accelerated the rate of polyaromatic hydrocarbon (PAH) mineralization. Cooney et al. (46) found that water-sediment mixtures from an oil-contaminated area of a freshwater lake exhibited higher rates of degradation of marker hydrocarbons in kerosene than did samples from the non-oiled area of the lake. Bauer and Capone (22) and Kerr and Capone (82) provided evidence for "cross-acclimation" of sediment microbial communities to PAHs, in which exposure to one compound, such as phenanthrene, effects an increase in metabolism rates of a compound of similar structure, such as naphthalene. The occurrence of this phenomenon was attributed to the broad specificity of selected microbial populations for PAHs and/or the existence of common pathways for PAH catabolism (22). The increase in transformation rates of naphthalene, phenanthrene, and benzo[a]pyrene with increasing ambient concentrations of PAHs, reported by Shiaris (124) for sediments of a polluted estuary, probably represents another example of cross-acclimation. Of the three mechanisms for adaptation of microbial communities to chemical contaminants, induction and derepression of enzymes, genetic changes, and selective enrichment, only the third has been examined in detail, as discussed in the previous section. 