The synchrotron radiation-based Fourier-transform infrared transflectance spectra at each position were collected using a single-element mercury cadmium telluride detector at a spectral resolution of 4 cm-1 with 32 co-added scans and a peak position accuracy of 1/100 cm−1. In transflectance, the synchrotron infrared beam transmitted through the cells, reflected off the gold-coated surface and then transmitted through the sample a second time before reaching the detector. Background spectra were acquired from neighboring locations without any cells and used as reference spectra for both samples and standards to remove background H2O and CO2 absorptions. All synchrotron radiation-based Fourier-transform infrared transflectance spectra were subjected to an array of data preprocessing and processing calculations using Thermo Electron’s Omnic version 7.3. The processing includes the computation conversion of transflectance to absorbance, spectrum baseline removal and univariate analysis. In the univariate analysis, the calculated infrared absorbance at each wavenumber in the mid-infrared region can also be related to the relative concentration of a particular chemical component through the Beer–Lambert Law. Because analysis of each spectral absorption band provides a single absorption value (representing the relative abundance of a chemical component), we also constructed two-dimensional images to visualize the relative abundance of petroleum products and microbial biomolecules. Hydrocarbon analysis The profile of Macondo crude oil (collected on 22 May 2010 directly from the Discovery Enterprise drill ship located above the wellhead) was determined by gas chromatography–mass spectrometry using an Agilent 6890N (Agilent Technologies). Triplicate samples of 0.2 μl of raw oil were directly injected to the column with no sample cleanup. This method was used to enable detection of low-molecular weight compounds that would be lost during sample processing or masked due to interference from solvent peaks. The Agilent 6890N was equipped with a 5972 mass selective detector and operated in SIM/SCAN mode. The injection temperature was 250 °C, detector temperature was 300 °C and column used was 60 m Agilent HP-1MS with a flow rate of 2 ml min−1. The oven temperature program included a 50°C hold for 3 min ramped to 300 °C at 4 °C min−1 with a final 10-min hold at 300 °C. Compound identification was determined from selective ion monitoring coupled with comparison with the known standards and compound spectra in the NIST 08MS library. Compounds were reported as fractions of total oil in Supplementary Figure S2 from averages of triplicate injections, the error bars indicating s.d. Hydrocarbon concentrations in all samples (Supplementary Table S1) were determined from water samples that were collected in the field and directly filtered through Sterivex filters (0.22 μm; Millipore, Billerica, MA, USA) as described previously (Hazen et al., 2010). Oil biomarkers from the plume samples matched to those observed from the Macondo well. Volatile aromatic hydrocarbons were measured using USEPA (US Environmental Protection Agency) methods 5030/8260b on an Agilent 6890 GC with a 5973 mass spectrometer detector. Initial oven temperature 10 °C, initial time 3 min, ramp 8–188 °C min−1, then 16–220 °C min−1 and hold for 9 min. Split ratio 25:1. Restek Rtx-VMS capillary column, 60 m length by 250 μm diameter and 1.40  μm film. Scan 50–550 m z−1. Top of page Results and discussion Throughout our analyses, we found differences in the microbial community structures of the samples collected from the two plume sites due to the differences in the amount of time the respective indigenous deep-sea microbes were exposed to hydrocarbons. Our samples were collected during the Deepwater Horizon spill within 24 h following the failed top kill effort (29 May 2010; proximal station). This effort resulted in a large influx of hydrocarbons into the deep sea on the dates that we sampled. Because of the movement of water in marine currents, we took the current velocity into account (6.7 km per day; Camilli et al., 2010; Hazen et al., 2010) when calculating the length of time that microbes in our samples had been exposed to hydrocarbons from the oil spill. Based on these calculations, the microbial communities would have been exposed to hydrocarbons for approximately 6 h by the time the plume reached the proximal station, whereas by the time the plume reached the distal station, the microbes would have been exposed to hydrocarbons for approximately 39 h. Hydrocarbons were not detected in the uncontaminated sample collected from plume depth. Analysis of our combined DNA sequence data (16S rRNA gene sequences from 454 ‘pyrotag sequencing’ and ‘total metagenomic DNA’) revealed that the plume samples had a lower microbial diversity than samples outside the plume (Supplementary Figure S3 and Table 1), with an enrichment of Oceanospirillales (Figure 2 and Supplementary Tables S2 and S3), as previously reported (Hazen et al., 2010; Redmond and Valentine, 2011). In the pyrotag data, one Oceanospirillales OTU comprised up to 80–90% of the proximal and distal plume communities, respectively, whereas it comprised only 3% of the total community in the uncontaminated sample (Figure 2 and Supplementary Table S2). 