The tank was packed with quartz sand particles and was maintained with residual water saturation, simulating the soil vadose zone in field capacity condition. The porous medium was carefully introduced into the microcosm using a funnel and rubber hose so that the particle distribution would be as uniform as possible. Water was also introduced carefully at the surface and drained at the bottom of the container. Glass and PVC tank filled with inert porous medium for 2D modelling of gasoline… Download full-size image Fig. 1. Glass and PVC tank filled with inert porous medium for 2D modelling of gasoline distribution and percolation; progression of one experiment. 2.3.2. Porous media Quartz sand (Potters) comprised the granular, homogenous medium used to fill the glass tank. The crushed quartz particles had sizes between 0.43 and 0.25 mm thus being classified as fine sand. 2.3.3. Contamination A single pulse of contamination (standard and 20% ethanol-amended gasoline) was applied with a funnel inserted into the surface of porous medium in the glass tank (Fig. 1). The average amount introduced was 192.9 g. Contaminant progression and distribution in the medium was then filmed and photographed and effluents collected to be quantified and analysed. 2.3.4. Chemical analysis Contaminants were analysed as described in paragraph Section 2.1.3.1. 3. Results 3.1. Biodegradation studies Microbiological analyses detected the initial impact of contamination on culturable bacterial populations as well as the stimulation of metabolic activity caused by contamination. Growth of culturable bacteria was inhibited by gasoline as well as by ethanol-blended gasoline contamination (Fig. 2), and resumed only when contaminant amounts were reduced (Fig. 3). The recovery of culturable populations occurred 40 days following contamination, while for gasoline–ethanol -contaminated soils, it was not observed until after the 65th day. This delayed recovery of culturable populations in soils containing ethanol-amended gasoline suggests a longer-lasting toxicity of soil when the contaminating gasoline is blended with ethanol. Culturable bacterial contingents after soil contamination with gasoline and… Download full-size image Fig. 2. Culturable bacterial contingents after soil contamination with gasoline and ethanol-amended gasoline, and in uncontaminated soil (CFU g−1 soil). Culturable bacterial numbers in contaminated and uncontaminated soils after… Download full-size image Fig. 3. Culturable bacterial numbers in contaminated and uncontaminated soils after contamination (CFU g−1 soil). 