73A Metagenomic analysis and metabolite profiling of deep–sea sediments from the Gulf of Mexico following the Deepwater Horizon oil spill Abstract Marine subsurface environments such as deep-sea sediments, house abundant and diverse microbial communities that are believed to influence large-scale geochemical processes. These processes include the biotransformation and mineralization of numerous petroleum constituents. Thus, microbial communities in the Gulf of Mexico are thought to be responsible for the intrinsic bioremediation of crude oil released by the Deepwater Horizon (DWH) oil spill. While hydrocarbon contamination is known to enrich for aerobic, oil-degrading bacteria in deep-seawater habitats, relatively little is known about the response of communities in deep-sea sediments, where low oxygen levels may hinder such a response. Here, we examined the hypothesis that increased hydrocarbon exposure results in an altered sediment microbial community structure that reflects the prospects for oil biodegradation under the prevailing conditions. We explore this hypothesis using metagenomic analysis and metabolite profiling of deep-sea sediment samples following the DWH oil spill. The presence of aerobic microbial communities and associated functional genes was consistent among all samples, whereas, a greater number of Deltaproteobacteria and anaerobic functional genes were found in sediments closest to the DWH blowout site. Metabolite profiling also revealed a greater number of putative metabolites in sediments surrounding the blowout zone relative to a background site located 127 km away. The mass spectral analysis of the putative metabolites revealed that alkylsuccinates remained below detection levels, but a homologous series of benzylsuccinates (with carbon chain lengths from 5 to 10) could be detected. Our findings suggest that increased exposure to hydrocarbons enriches for Deltaproteobacteria, which are known to be capable of anaerobic hydrocarbon metabolism. We also provide evidence for an active microbial community metabolizing aromatic hydrocarbons in deep-sea sediments of the Gulf of Mexico. The Deepwater Horizon (DWH) blowout resulted in the largest marine US oil spill to date, in which 4.1 million barrels of crude oil flowed into the depths of the Gulf of Mexico (Operational Science Advisory Team, 2010). Although an estimated 78% of the oil was depleted through either human intervention or natural means by August 2010 (Ramseur, 2010), the fate of the remaining 22% was uncertain. Evidence subsequently showed that both oil (Hazen et al., 2010; Mason et al., 2012) and gas (Kessler et al., 2011) persisted in the Gulf of Mexico water column, affecting deep-sea (>1000 m) microbial communities that potentially facilitate the biodegradation of residual hydrocarbons. Much less is known about the impact of anthropogenic hydrocarbons on the microbial communities of deep-sea sediments. Although much of the hydrocarbons from sub-sea oil spills and natural seeps may rise to the surface, there are water-soluble components in oil as well as hydrocarbons adhering to solid particulates that can settle in deep-sea sediments (Ramseur, 2010). After the 1979 Ixtoc I oil spill, for example, in which over three million barrels of oil flowed into the Gulf of Mexico, it is estimated that 25% of the oil was transported to the sea floor (Jernelov and Linden, 1981). The deep-sea biosphere, including deep-sea sediments, is both one of the largest and one of the most understudied ecosystems on earth (Jøgensen, 2011). Although the global estimates of prokaryotic biomass supported by deep-subsurface sediments are lower than originally thought, regional variation supports the presence of abundant and diverse sub-seafloor microbial communities in continental shelf areas, such as the Gulf of Mexico (Kallmeyer et al., 2012). This is especially true for the more surficial sediment communities, such as those utilized in this study. Evidence suggests that these deep-sea sediment communities support diverse metabolic activities (D’Hondt et al., 2004, 2009), including evidence of hydrocarbon degradation in microbial communities associated with cold water hydrocarbon seeps located in the Gulf of Mexico (Joye et al., 2004; Lloyd et al., 2006, 2010; Orcutt et al., 2010). As a result, it has been suggested that the microbial communities in the Gulf of Mexico deep-sea sediment would play a role in the biodegradation of persistent oil components following the DWH blowout. Despite numerous advances pertaining to individual microorganisms capable of metabolizing hydrocarbon compounds (Seth-Smith, 2010) and community responses to natural hydrocarbon seeps (Lloyd et al., 2010; Orcutt et al., 2010), little is known about the microbial capacity for oil-degradation within deep-sea sediment communities under the circumstances presented by the DWH spill, including the extreme depth (~1500 m) and the sudden hydrocarbon exposure. To gain a better understanding of the sediment-associated microbial response to the DWH oil spill, deep-sea sediment cores were collected by a Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory (LBNL) team aboard the R/V Gyre in the area surrounding the DWH oil spill between September 19 and October 10, 2010. Preliminary chemical analysis revealed that the cores closest to the DWH spill contained high levels of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs; >24,000 μg/kg) compared to distant cores (~50 μg/kg), confirming a greater exposure of the resident microflora to aromatic hydrocarbons near the DWH well (Operational Science Advisory Team, 2010). Although it is likely that the DWH oil spill contributed to the higher PAH levels observed, other sources that could have influenced these levels include natural seeps located near the DWH site and drilling fluids. In this study, we hypothesized that increased hydrocarbon exposure results in the alteration of microbial community structure, such that it reflects the selection for organisms capable of the anaerobic metabolism of petroleum constituents. We performed metagenomic sequencing on three of the deep-sea sediment samples collected by LBNL (described above) and compared our results to a Gulf of Mexico deep-subsurface sediment metagenomic library sequenced prior to the DWH oil spill (Biddle et al., 2011). To complement the metagenomic analysis, metabolic profiling was used to detect homologous series of putative signature metabolites associated with anaerobic hydrocarbon biodegradation. 