The resulting distance matrix was imported into Primer6 and visualized using a nonparametric multidimensional scaling plot (NMDS). The same method was used to generate an NMDS plot of an averaged weighted UniFrac distance matrix and is included in the supplemental material. An analysis of similarity test was performed on the Bray-Curtis distance matrix to determine whether grouping samples by oil presence was significant. Indicator species were identified using a similarity of percentages test in Primer6. Samples were grouped into five types by location (Pensacola and St. George Island), oil presence, and nucleic acid type. Quantitative molecular analyses for tracking total bacteria and Alcanivorax.Quantification of bacterial small subunit rRNA genes (SSU rRNA) was performed according to the method of Nadkarni et al. (Table 1) (55). Primers and probes were ordered from Integrated DNA Technologies (IDT; Coralville, IA), and all had working concentrations of 100 nM in the PCR mastermix. The probe was labeled with a 6-carboxyfluorescein (6-FAM) fluorophore and contained an Iowa Black fluorescent quencher and an internal ZEN quencher (IDT) located nine bases from the 5′ end. All reactions were performed in triplicate and analyzed using an ABI 7900HT Fast real-time PCR system. A new primer set was developed to target SSU rRNA genes from bacteria of the genus Alcanivorax (Table 1; see the supplemental material for further details). Briefly, primers were designed using the “probe design” feature of the phylogenetic analysis program package ARB (48) and checked for specificity within ARB and by basic local alignment search tool (BLAST) analyses. These primers were used with the probe developed for domain-level bacterial quantitative PCR (qPCR) analyses under similar PCR conditions. Primers were designed to have similar annealing properties to the general primers described by Nadkarni et al. (55), and the qPCR was performed as described above. For both bacterial and Alcanivorax-specific qPCR assays, absolute quantification was performed using a standard curve derived from PCR products of the Alcanivorax dieselolei isolate from the present study generated by near-full gene amplification of SSU rRNA genes using the general bacterial primer set 27F and 1492R (41, 72). Standard curves were linear across a six-orders-of-magnitude range (from 2.79 × 108 to 2.79 × 102 copies/reaction), with similar efficiencies (92 to 94%). qPCR data were analyzed using principal component analysis, as implemented within the software package Primer6. Gene abundance values were fourth-root transformed to meet assumptions of normality. Previous Section Next Section RESULTS Changes in hydrocarbon composition.Representative samples were selected for hydrocarbon analysis in order to quantify the extent of contamination, to verify our visual observations of oil contamination, and to determine which fractions of oil hydrocarbons in beach sands were depleted in comparison to the source oil collected from the DH wellhead. Chemical analysis revealed petroleum hydrocarbon (C8 to C40) concentrations ranging from 3.1 to 4,500 mg kg−1 in Pensacola Beach sands. All beach sand samples analyzed contained detectable oil hydrocarbon concentrations. At the lower range of contamination detected by chemical analysis (<10 mg kg−1), oil was not observed visually (Table 2). View this table: In this window In a new window TABLE 2. Summary comparison of the chemical analysis of total petroleum hydrocarbons, qualitative determination of oil presence, and molecular quantification of bacterial abundance in Pensacola Beach sands collected from 2 July to 2 September 2010 Two oiled beach sand samples were subjected to detailed chemical analysis (Table 3). In these sand samples considered to be moderately or heavily contaminated by visual observations, total petroleum hydrocarbon concentrations were 1,900 and 4,500 mg kg−1, respectively. Comparison to the source oil from the DH wellhead indicated substantial weathering in that the majority of detectable hydrocarbon compounds that remained resided in the higher-molecular-weight aliphatic (>C16) and aromatic (>C35) fractions (Table 3). When these samples were collected on 1 September, approximately 18 weeks after the onset of the DH spill, detectable polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons and lighter aliphatics (C6 to C16) and aromatics (C8 to C21) were reduced to near the detection limit. Heavier compounds such as larger alkanes (>C21) have been shown to be degraded more slowly than corresponding lighter alkanes (<C21). 