Response of indigenous bacterial communities to oil contamination in marine sands.Microorganisms with the capacity to degrade hydrocarbons are among the best-studied microbial groups in applied and environmental microbiology. Indeed, more than 200 bacterial, algal, and fungal genera, encompassing over 500 species, have been recognized as capable of hydrocarbon degradation (see reviews by Head et al. [27] and Yakimov et al. [76]). Much progress has been made to determine the response of specific bacterial taxa to oil contamination in marine environments impacted by oil spills (for reviews, see references 4, 5, 23, 27, 42, and 50). However, our ability to understand and predict the dynamics of in situ bacterial communities responding to environmental stimuli such as the presence of oil contamination remains in its infancy (27, 60). The majority of previous work on hydrocarbon-degrading bacterial communities in the marine environment has been conducted under enrichment conditions in laboratory microcosms (12, 13, 45, 52, 57, 69, 75). Of the fewer studies that have been conducted in the field, most have focused on biostimulation, for instance the application of nutrients to enhance oil bioremediation (46, 49, 64, 68). Thus, a paucity of information exists on the response of indigenous bacterial communities to oil contamination under in situ or natural attenuation conditions (2, 36, 51). The DH oil spill disaster in the Gulf of Mexico has inspired a number of studies that address this knowledge gap, with most of them to date centered on bacterioplankton communities of the deep ocean (26, 37, 70). In our study, cultivation-based and molecular enumeration of bacterial communities showed a distinct impact of oil on overall bacterial numbers and specifically on the abundance of known oil degraders in Gulf beach sands. Not surprisingly, bacterial abundance increased as oil provides a major source of carbon and electrons in an otherwise nutrient-starved marine environment. Based on an extensive molecular data set from three field campaigns, we show that bacteria in Pensacola Beach sands were on average 2 to 4 orders of magnitude more abundant in the presence of oil contamination (Fig. 2 and 3); and high cultivatable counts as well as RNA-based analyses support the premise that the majority of bacteria in oiled sands are active. These results are consistent with past field research on oiled beaches (2, 46, 49, 63). We further show that the abundance of the known hydrocarbonoclastic group of Alcanivorax spp. increased in response to oil contamination, and a comparison of bacterial ribosome abundance in RNA extracts indicated that Alcanivorax abundance was proportionately greater within the active bacterial community (data not shown). Few previous studies have applied quantitative molecular approaches to determine the abundance of hydrocarbon degraders in situ. In a field bioremediation experiment, Singh et al. (68) reported an elevated abundance of Alcanivorax spp. in beach plots amended with oil plus fertilizer but not in plots treated with oil alone. Oil began to come ashore at Pensacola Beach in early June, and we observed a bloom of Alcanivorax spp. and overall bacteria by early July, approximately 4 weeks after the initial oiling event. Maximum abundance was observed in our aerobic bacterial cultures after 1 to 2 weeks of incubation. Thus, our results indicate that the native microbial communities in beach sands respond fairly quickly to oil contamination, metabolizing oil to support growth at a rate which is within a factor of 2 to 4 in comparison to pure cultures. Coupled with our observation that oiled sands were depleted in low-molecular-weight aliphatic and aromatic hydrocarbons, the elevated abundance of hydrocarbon degraders provides an early indication that natural attenuation is a viable strategy for the mitigation of oil contamination in Pensacola Beach sands. The proportion of Alcanivorax spp. to the total community was lower at Pensacola Beach in comparison to past studies which used nutrient amendments to stimulate biodegradation. Conditions in subtropical sands (temperature, oxygen supply, and nutrients; see below) appear to favor a broader diversity of hydrocarbon degraders that might render biostimulation unnecessary. 