Interestingly, a Geobacter cluster organism, FeR, was also the dominant member of toluene-degrading enrichment cultures established with sediments from the Bemidji site (4). Comparison of FeR to the Geobacteraceaesequences described here suggested that FeR was closely related to, but distinct from, Benz-76 (sharing 94 of 102 base positions). Another sequence that was consistently recovered from the benzene-degrading sediments but not the uncontaminated sediments was Gthrx-84, which is most closely related to G. fermentans.G. fermentans is capable of completely oxidizing acetate to carbon dioxide with Fe(III) serving as the sole electron acceptor but, in contrast to several Geobacter species, it does not use aromatic compounds (28). A sequence closely related toG. fermentans was recovered from the benzene-oxidizing, Fe(III)-reducing enrichment culture, but the DGGE band for this sequence was not as intense as the Geobacter band. Thus, it is not known if this organism was involved in the benzene degradation or survived on the products of the Geobacter sp. in the enrichment that is hypothesized to have been the benzene degrader. Previous studies employing a dilution-to-extinction culturing method demonstrated that G. fermentans was a numerically dominant acetate-oxidizing Fe(III) reducer in uncontaminated sediments from Bemidji, as well as in sediments from the benzene-degrading, Fe(III) reduction zone (4). In contrast to the pervasiveness ofGeothrix spp., Geobacter spp. were only numerically significant in the zone of benzene degradation in those culturing studies. While Gthrx-84 was not detected in the uncontaminated sediments, this sequence was found at comparable band intensities in all of the sediments in which Fe(III) reduction was the TEAP. The fact that the Gthrx-84 sequence was not uniquely enriched in the zone of benzene degradation suggests that it is not specifically involved in benzene degradation at site IR-3. In a similar manner, although the sequence Beta-169 was recovered from site IR-3 but not from the uncontaminated site, the intensities of the Beta-169 band were similar in all three Fe(III)-reducing sites, suggesting that it was not uniquely associated with benzene degradation. The sequence Beta-142 that was also found at site IR-3 but not at the uncontaminated site is most closely related to V. parodoxusHW1 (20) and an unidentified toluene degrader, strain D8 (33). V. parodoxus is an obligate aerobe (46), and although they have not been characterized, strains HW1 and D8 were also grown under aerobic conditions (20,33). Therefore, it seems unlikely that these organisms are capable of aromatic degradation under anaerobic, Fe(III)-reducing conditions. In addition, Beta-142 was detected at other Fe(III)-reducing sites, albeit with lower band intensities (Fig. 3), indicating that its presence is not unique to the benzene-oxidizing site, IR-3. However, a sequence closely related to V. parodoxus was recovered from the benzene-oxidizing, Fe(III)-reducing enrichment culture along with a Geobactersequence and a Geothrix sequence. Thus, the possibility that an organism(s) closely related to V. parodoxus is involved in anaerobic benzene degradation cannot be eliminated. Similarly, it is possible that anaerobic benzene degradation is carried out by a microbial consortium that includes Geobacter sp.,Geothrix sp., and a relative of V. parodoxus, all of which were detected in both the benzene-oxidizing sediments and the enrichment. In summary, although comparative analysis of 16S rDNA sequences does not allow definitive determination of which microorganisms are responsible for a specific metabolism in the environment, the results suggest that specific Geobacter spp. are associated with the capacity for benzene degradation in this petroleum-contaminated aquifer. Evidence supporting this conclusion includes (i) the significant increase in Geobacteraceae within the zone of benzene degradation; (ii) specific enrichment of a tight phylogenetic cluster of Geobacter spp. in the zone of benzene degradation that is not found in the uncontaminated sediments; (iii) the fact that the genus Geobacter contains organisms known to be able to oxidize aromatic compounds with the reduction of Fe(III); and (iv) the finding that Geobacter spp. were dominant organisms in a benzene-oxidizing, Fe(III)-reducing enrichment culture established with benzene-degrading sediments from this aquifer. This is an important finding because, to date, the specific enrichment ofGeobacter spp. is the only variable which has been found to be associated with the capacity for anaerobic benzene degradation at this site. 