The increase in the water content in the soil, reduces the air filled porosity, especially in a moisture retaining layer at about 0.1 to 0.3 m below the ground surface, which restricts vapour and oxygen transport. Thus in wet periods, aromatic hydrocarbons penetrate much higher in the soil profile, and oxygen penetration is shallower (Figure 5, Davis et al. 2000). Biodegradation in the vadose zone Despite seasonal variability in the profiles of aromatic hydrocarbons and oxygen in the soil profile, the presence of oxygen coincided with an absence of aromatic hydrocarbons (Figure 5; Davis et al. 2000). Field analyses of groundwater samples have indicated that the amount of BTX in groundwater is directly related to the availability of dissolved oxygen. Aromatic hydrocarbons are absent from groundwater in the vicinity of contaminated sites if the dissolved oxygen content is greater than 0.9 mg l−1 (Chiang et al. 1989). Zeroth order oxygen consumption rates can be determined from steady state oxygen versus depth pro- files, provided the effective diffusion coefficient for oxygen in the soil is known. In some cases this may be problematic as, diffusion may be markedly affected by factors such as moisture content (Davis et al. 2000). The stoichiometric conversion of oxygen depletion data to hydrocarbon degradation may also be problematic as other oxidisable organic matter or oxidisable inorganic reduced species (sulfur gases, Fe(II), NH3) may account for some of the oxygen consumption (Davis et al. 1998). From oxygen consumption profiles, Davis et al. (1998) determined a hydrocarbon degradation rate of between 110 to 170 mg-hexane. With an average air-filled porosity of 0.49 m3 m−3 and a bulk density of 1340 kg m−3, this equates to degradation rates of between 41 to 64 mg (kg day)−1. These rates are high when compared with rates determined in other studies that have measured biodegradation of vapours from petroleum products during active bioventing as reported by Hoeppel et al. (1991) [up to 10 mg (kg day)−1 for JP-4 at Hill AFB; 2–20 mg (kg day)−1 for JP-4 at Tyndall AFB; 8 mg (kg day)−1 for diesel in The Netherlands; 3 mg (kg day)−1 for JP-5 at Patuxent River, Maryland; 5 mg (kg day)−1 for JP-5 at Fallon, Nevada; 1 to 10 mg (kg day)−1 for JP-5 at Eilson AFB, Alaska]. To determine an unambiguous mineralisation rate for volatile aromatics, Franzmann et al. (1999) used 14C-ring-benzene in microcosms with core material from a range of depths in the soil profile to measure the potential for the soil microbial community for benzene mineralisation. The concentrations of aromatic hydrocarbons, oxygen and carbon dioxide in the soil profile at the time of sample collection are given in Table 6, as are the mineralisation rates, and estimates of the microbial biomass at different depths within the soil profile. Soil from a depth of 0.25 m showed the greatest potential for mineralisation of 14C-benzene 83 ± 13 µmol (kg day)−1 [which is equivalent to 6.5 ± 1 mg (kg day)−1] (Table 6). Soil from this depth was exposed to a plentiful supply of hydrocarbon vapour and oxygen, 11.3 mg l−1 and 13%, respectively. At a depth of 0.5 m, the oxygen content dropped to 3% and approached the range that may be limiting for total petroleum hydrocarbon (TPH) mineralisation (2–5%; Hickey 1995). The microbial population at this depth showed a slightly less propensity for hydrocarbon mineralisation. At the surface, the microbial population was not exposed to measurable concentrations of TPH (i.e., <1 mg l−1 ) but showed considerable propensity to mineralise aromatic hydrocarbons. In fact, the surface microbial population mineralised hydrocarbons at about the same rate as measured in surface soils from the Swan Coastal Plain that were not associated with hydrocarbon contamination (23 to 42 µmol (kg day)−1; Franzmann et al. 1998). Further evidence for the lack of hydrocarbon exposure to the microbial population in the surface soil was the relative lack of trans isomer monounsaturated fatty acids in the phospholipid fraction extracted from this soil (Table 6). 