The tree was constructed using PHYLIP and the Jukes-Cantor measure of distance. Bootstrap values are indicated. Reproduced from Robertson et al. (2000), under copyright permission from Blackwell Science. groundwater alone in microcosms would greatly underestimate the potential for microbial degradation of the contaminants. Tracking Desulfosporosinus meridiei in the plume The only sulfate-reducing species that was isolated from the plume was Desulfosporosinus meridiei, which would have evaded detection by the FISH technique used in the initial studies, and which did not contain the PLFA signatures usually indicative of sulfate-reducing bacteria. To examine the plume for the presence of Desulfosporosinus meridiei, both species-specific polyclonal fluorescent antibodies and FISH probes, as well as eubacterial FISH probes were prepared (Robertson 2000). The reaction of cultured cells to the polyclonal antibodies and the speciesspecific FISH probes are shown in Figure 4. The outcomes of the FISH and antibody probing are given in Table 5. Robertson’s study was limited to the examination of groundwater due to the cost and other constraints on re-drilling for core material. Although cultured cells of Desulfosporosinus meridiei produced a signal when probed with the oligonucleotide probe, the cells fluoresced faintly when compared with the signal produced by cells subjected to antibody probing (Figure 4). Cells of Desulfosporosinus meridiei were not detected in any groundwater sample by the FISH probe designed for Desulfosporosinus meridiei. Desulfosporosinus meridiei was detected by antibody probing, but numbers were less than 0.2% of the total population of cells (the numbers detected by DAPI staining). What is also of note, was that numbers of Desulfosporosinus meridiei were as great in water from outside the plume (MP9) as in groundwater drawn from inside the plume (MP11, MP16, MP8; Table 5). This is consistent with the observation that groundwater from outside the plume showed the same potential to mineralise toluene, under sulfate-reducing conditions, as water drawn from inside the plume. At best, 29% of the DAPI-stained cells in the groundwater samples stained with the bacterial probe EUB338 (Table 5). The outcomes of the use of FISH probing of aquifer material have rarely been reported. Zarda et al. (1998) reported that between 3 to 42% of the cells that stained with DAPI in aquifer material contaminated with aromatic hydrocarbons, could be detected by FISH with probe EUB338. As pointed out by Zarda et al. (1998), detection rates after hybridization with probe EUB338 are used as an indication for the presence of metabolically active cells which contain sufficient amounts of rRNA coupled with sufficient cell permeability or permeabilisation to permit their detection. Watanabe et al. (2000) found that FISH was much poorer than PCR and denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis (DGGE) at detection of microorganisms in groundwater associated with crude oil storage facilities. In their study, labeled cells exhibited weak signals, which was attributed to low rRNA contents resulting from a groundwater residence time of 7 days in the cavities, and limited availability of electron acceptors. The intensity of the signal obtained with FISH rapidly decreases with cell age, to less than 20% of the initial intensity by day 25 for some sulfate-reducing bacteria (Bade et al. 2000). In slow moving groundwater, in which the transport of nutrients to and products away from cells would be extremely slow, the average cell age must be much greater than in dynamic environments such as activated sludge, in which sludge age is usually less than 10 days, and in which the use of FISH probing is considerably more successful (Daims et al. 1999). However, Fredrickson et al. 