The amplification products were purified using the PCR purification kit (QIAGEN GmbH, Hilden, Germany) and checked for expected product size (550 bp) by agarose gel electrophoresis (100 V, 25 min). The nucleotide sequence was established directly from the PCR product using primer T7. Species identification was made by comparison with GenBank database using Basic Local Alignment Search Tool (BLAST) analysis. Liquid culture on diesel and various petroleum hydrocarbons For measurement of diesel-degrading ability, 50 ll (1%, v/v) of inoculum and 50 ll (1%, v/v) of diesel (as a carbon source) were incubated with shaking (30 C and 180 rev/min) in 4.90 ml BH media. To determine the maximum specific growth rates and maximum dieseldegrading rates, 12.5 ll of diesel was applied and all other conditions were maintained. To obtain the optimal growth conditions of IU5, 100 ll (2%) of IU5 culture and 50 ll (1%) of diesel were added to 4.85 ml BH media and cultivated with mixing at 10, 20, and 30 C, respectively. At each temperature, the sample pH was adjusted at 5, 6, 7 and 8 using phosphate buffer, and the diesel-degrading capacity was investigated by GC analysis of the total petroleum hydrocarbon (TPH) concentrations. To test potential degradation of other petroleum hydrocarbons by IU5, we examined the microbe’s growth characteristics on benzene, toluene, ethylbenzene and xylene (BTEX) (0.1% (v/v) of each), PAHs (naphthalene, phenanthrene and pyrene) (0.025% (w/w) of each), gasoline, diesel and crude oil (1.0% (v/v) of each). IU5 culture [1% (v/v)] was inoculated into each hydrocarbon medium, samples were cultivated at 30 C and 180 rev/min for 72 or 144 h, and growth was measured by OD600 nm. Soil-slurry culture on diesel For diesel-degradation tests, soil was obtained from the campus at Ewha Woman’s University, Seoul, Korea. To equalize soil particles, the soil was airdried, passed through 850 and 600 lm sieves and oven-dried at 80 C for 24 h. Five grams of soil, 4 ml of IU5 culture and 50 ll of diesel were mixed, sealed and cultivated in incubator at 30 C. To extract the total petroleum hydrocarbons, 5 ml hexane was added to the culture solutions, three of which were used every 6 or 12 h for GC analysis and biomass measurement. Analysis of diesel and biomass TPH extracted into the hexane (upper) layer was mixed well, filtered and then analysed by GC (Hewlett Packard Series II 5890, FL, USA) with a flame ionization detector, using an HP-5 capillary column (30 m length, 0.23 mm internal diameter and 2.5 lm film thickness). The GC program was set up as described in our previous study (Kim et al. 2003). External diesel in hexane was used for calibration, and the TPH standard was used as the internal standard (ASTM D5442 C12-C60 quantitative linearity standard, Supelco) (Bellefonte, PA, USA). Biomass was measured in the aqueous phase (lower layer) by monitoring attendance (OD) at 600 nm using a spectrophotometer (Milton-Roy Spectronic 20, USA). The diesel-degrading capabilities of all nine isolates were tested using the hexadecane (C16) reduction ratio as representing degradation of diesel compounds. Of the nine tested isolates, IU5 was best able to degrade diesel. This strain was classified as Pseudomonas aeruginosa based on MIDI results showing 97% homology (main cellular fatty acids: C 16:00, C 18:1) and 16s rDNA sequencing showing 98% homology. Also, five other isolated strains (IU1, IU2, IU4, IU6, and U2) were identified as Pseudomonas aeruginosa based on MIDI results. Our finding was consistent with a previous report which found that Pseudomonas sp. was the most degradative bacterium in a mixed bacterial consortium isolated from oil-contaminated soil samples (Rahman et al. 2002). We next examined the growth properties of this isolate on various petroleum hydrocarbons other than diesel (data not shown). We found that strain IU5 grew on crude oil equally as well as it grew on diesel, while it showed a slightly lower affinity for gasoline. In addition, this strain seemed to degrade many other hydrocarbons such as benzene, toluene, xylene, naphthalene, phenanthrene and pyrene, but not ethylbenzene. This result implied that a mixture of hydrocarbons stimulated the growth more than a single kind of hydrocarbon, due to the presence of more carbon sources. Especially in this study, we found a strain of P. aeruginosa capable of using pyrene, which has the most complex ring structure among the PAHs of crude oil, as a unique carbon source in pure culture. Diesel-degrading bacterium IU5 383 Although a previous report mentioned that P. aeruginosa can use a large variety of carbon sources (Holloway 1996), not all strains can grow on such a broad range of hydrocarbons. 