Differences were seen in both patterns and rates of degradation. Benzene mineralization, in particular, has proven to be an elusive activity. Many researchers have reported that benzene was recalcitrant when sulfate was present (Ball & Reinhard 1996; Edwards et al. 1992; Langenhoff et al. 1996; Reinhard et al. 1997) but others have demonstrated biodegradation under these same conditions (Edwards & Grbic-Galic, 1992; Kazumi et al. 1997; Lovley et al. 1995; Phelps et al. 1996). We were interested in finding out if there was a difference in the degradation of BTEX in enrichment cultures established under identical conditions using different sediments as inocula. It was our goal to determine if differences between contaminated and pristine environments would have an effect on the degradation of BTEX under different anaerobic conditions. We aim to comprehensively compare sediments from these environments in microcosms using identical protocols, media and incubation conditions in order to demonstrate the effects of the different inocula and electron acceptors. We established enrichment cultures using sediment from four different sites, under five different reducing conditions in order to examine the effect of sediment characteristics and electron acceptors on BTEX biodegradation. The four sites were chosen because of their different histories of contamination and sediment characteristics. Two marine sites, one polluted (Arthur Kill) (AK) and the other pristine (Tuckerton) (TKT) were compared to two freshwater sites, also polluted (Onondaga Lake) (OL) and pristine (Blue Mtn. Lake) (BML). The Arthur Kill is part of the New York/New Jersey Harbor Estuary and is characterized by a long history of industrial development and pollution. Petroleum and other hazardous chemicals are frequently released into its waters (Brosnan & O’Shea 1993; Gunster et al. 1993; Holliday & Klein 1993). Similarly, Onondaga Lake, N.Y. has been the subject of industrial inputs, including mercury, petroleum, PCB’s and other chlorinated compounds since the late 1800’s (Effler & Harnett 1996; Perkins & Romanowicz 1996). In contrast, the other sites are both considered to be free from gross anthropogenic impacts. The Tuckerton site is an unpolluted site (Gary Taghon, personal communication), located on the continental shelf off the coast of an undeveloped part of southern New Jersey. Blue Mtn. Lake is an oligotrophic lake located within the boundaries of the Adirondack Park (New York), and has low annual inputs of nutrients or other pollutants (Martin & Hyde 1995). Inocula for the enrichment cultures were collected from four different sites. All samples were taken from the top 20 cm of sediment. At the two polluted sites (AK and OL), this material was highly anaerobic, in the others (BML and TKT) the samples quickly became anoxic during storage. AK sediment was collected in ∼5 m of water using a coring device. OL was sampled using a Ponar dredge at a depth of m. Surface sediments at the other sites (BML and TKT) were collected with simple scoops. 