Micrococcus sp. GS2-22, Corynebacterium sp. GS5-66, Flavobacterium sp. DS5-73, Bacillus sp. DS6-86, and Pseudomonas sp. DS10-129, all had excellent growth. Among the four pH (6.5, 7.5 and 8.5) tested, pH 7.5 was found optimum for all the bacterial isolates and bacterial consortium (data not shown). Hence the pH 7.5 was selected for further experiments. All the five individual isolates and bacterial consortium showed maximum activity and crude oil degradation at 30°C and population also correspondingly increased (Fig. 4). Bacterial consortium showed maximum (78%) degradation and reached a population size of about 9 x 108 CFU ml-1 while using 1% BH crude oil as substrate. Figure 4. Percentage degradation and bacterial growth at 1% BH crude oil by selected oil degraders and bacterial consortium in mineral salts medium at pH 7.5 and temperature 30oC. Bacteria, actinomycetes and fungal populations were high in samples GS-5 and DS-9, where higher quantities of oil contents were noticed. Similarly large population of bacteria, actinomycetes and fungi were recorded from oil-spilled environment (Venkateswaran et al. 1993; Wrenn and Venosa 1996; Cabello 1997). Population levels of hydrocarbon utilisers and their population within the microbial community appear to be a sensitive index of environmental exposure to hydrocarbons. In unpolluted ecosystem, hydrocarbon utilisers generally constitute less than 0.1% of the microbial community and in oil polluted ecosystems they can constitute upto 100% of the viable microorganisms. The microbial populations quantitatively reflect the degree or extent of exposure of that ecosystem to hydrocarbon contamination (Atlas 1981; Al-gounaim et al. 1995). In general, gasoline and diesel station soil samples contained Corynebacterium species at higher proportion. The dominance of the genus Corynebacterium revealed that it might have developed the ability to acclimatize to the oil environment. We observed bacteria belonged to diversified groups, which may be due to the oil enrichment. The changes in the dynamic equilibrium state of soil or aquatic environment leads to a corresponding change in microbial population and composition. The added oil enriched for the species that have inherent petroleum hydrocarbon assimilating potential (Bossert and Bartha 1984), whereas the less adapted species among the total heterotrophic population are gradually eliminated, resulting in qualitative shifts in species composition (Amadi 1990). The biochemical characteristics of the bacteria varied. Austin et al. (1977) reported that the biochemical reactions of the petroleum degraders, as a whole, were not uniform and no pattern of relatedness were discernible based on the reactions. In oil-spilled soil, lipolytic forms were present in high numbers, which may be due to richness of lipid source available in the area. 