3. Results and discussion 3.1. Microbial enrichments Slices of shale were used in the microbial enrichments in an attempt to simulate the physical conditions existing in petroleum reservoirs and improve the growth of the microorganisms in the petroleum samples. The technique of microbial cell immobilization is widely used to increase biomass in anaerobic reactors (Silva et al., 2006), although the choice of an ideal support is a limiting factor in the selection of microbial populations. In this study, the microbial enrichments were developed using hexadecane or a non-biodegraded petroleum sample (P1) as carbon source, with the goal of recovering microorganisms that might be involved in hydrocarbon biodegradation. Shale was not chosen randomly as a support for microbial growth and increased DNA recovery. Previous enrichment assays using different matrices have shown that the use of shale afforded the highest level of DNA recovery (data not shown). After 120 days monitoring, intense biomass generation was observed. with a cellular density higher >108 CFU/ml for both substrates (hexadecane and P1). The same microbial enrichments showed up to 69% sulfate reduction, suggesting the presence of sulfate-reducing bacteria in both enrichments. 3.2. DNA extraction Total DNA extraction was successful for both aerobic and anaerobic enrichments, affording high molecular weight DNA (up to 40 kb) at P50 ng/ll for the aerobic enrichment and P100 ng/ll for the anaerobic enrichment (Fig. 2). The use of hexadecane as a substrate in the anaerobic enrichment was more efﬁcient for the recovery of hydrocarbon-biodegrading bacteria than the enrichment using P1 oil and resulted in a larger amount of DNA recovered (Fig. 2). In contrast, no difference in DNA yield was observed in the aerobic enrichment using hexadecane or P1 oil. DNA samples obtained using both carbon sources were pooled and used for diversity analysis. For the construction of the metagenomic library, DNA samples from both the aerobic and anaerobic enrichments were pooled and treated as a single sample. Fig. 2. Total DNA extraction obtained from petroleum bacterial enrichments. Lanes M1: Lambda phage genomic DNA (k) 25 ng; M2: k 50 ng, M3: k 100 ng; M4: k 200 ng; (a) DNA from aerobic enrichment; (b) DNA from anaerobic enrichment using hexadecane as carbon source; and (c) DNA from anaerobic enrichment using P1 oil as carbon source. 3.3. Diversity analysis The bacterial diversity of the aerobic (AER) and anaerobic (ANA) enrichments was evaluated by analysis of 16S rRNA gene clone libraries. A total of 96 clones from the AER library and 91 from the ANA library were screened by ARDRA to select different ribotypes for subsequent sequencing and phylogenetic analysis. Combined data from ARDRA and sequencing revealed that the bacterial members represented in the 16S rDNA library from the aerobic enrichment were afﬁliated (78%) with the genera Petrobacter (Phylum Proteobacteria, Class Betaproteobacteria) and (22%) Micromonospora/Verrucosispora (Phylum Actinobacteria) (Table 1, Fig. 3). The anaerobic microbiota represented in the 16S rDNA library from the biodegraded petroleum sample were more diverse, and the bacterial members were related to the genera Flexistipes (24%) (Phylum Deferribacteres), Thermodesulfovibrio (20%) (Phylum Nitrospirae), Petrotoga (15.4%) (Phylum Thermotogae), Anaerobaculum (2.2%) (Phylum Synergistetes) and Rahnella (38.4%) (Phylum Proteobacteria, Class Gammaproteobacteria) (Table 1, Fig. 3). 