In parallel, a 100% reduction of the n-alkanes with chain lengths of C11–C12 and C31–C34 was obtained. The n-alkane spectrum after the 14 months landfarming treatment showed yet a further reduction of all n-alkanes from the levels observed after 10 months. Again, the concentrations of lowand medium-chain length n-alkanes were reduced. In this case, n-alkanes with chain lengths of C14– C21 and C30 were depleted more than 50%, whereas the n-alkane tridecane was completely reduced. However, the amounts of n-alkanes with chain lengths of C22–C29 were 5–35% lower than the levels measured after the 10-month treatment (Figure 1). As shown in Figure 1, the highest level of degradation of n-alkanes occurred during the first 4 months of treatment, suggesting the existence of an active bacterial community in this period. Kaplan & Kitts (2004) reported also a rapid degradation of petroleum hydrocarbons in a land treatment unit during the first period of the soil pollution. The degradation rate is decreased during the later phase. Bacterial community analyses using 16S rDNA T-RFLP fingerprinting T-RFLP fingerprinting of PCR-amplified 16S rDNA was used to assess the relative diversity of the microbial communities existing in the six investigated soil communities. DNA was extracted from the different soil samples: (a) the non-polluted control soil; (b) the fresh refinery waste sludge; and (c) the landfarming soil (at the time of its construction, after 4 months, after 10 months Figure 1. Changes in the composition of n-alkanes in the landfarming soil. Samples were collected from soil from the landfarming site treated with refinery waste sludge, at the beginning of the experiment and after 4, 10 and 14 months treatment. 173 and after 14 months treatment). The T-RFLP analyses were used to compare the compositions of the soil bacterial communities. The similarities between the six different complex bacterial communities were analysed, and the origins of predominant bacterial groups were elucidated by comparing the communities qualitatively. Thus, the evaluation of the T-RFLP profiles was carried out by observation of the presence or absence of specific T-RFs. The measured community profiles were labelled only with the ‘blue’ FAM dye at the 5¢-end of the T-RFs. The T-RFLP fingerprints of all six soil samples were complex, each demonstrating different profiles (Figure 2). The overall 16S rDNA T-RFLP fingerprint patterns of the bacterial communities in the soil of the Figure 2. T-RFLP assessment of diversity of (a) untreated control site; (b) fresh refinery waste sludge; (c) landfarming site directly after augmentation with waste sludge; (d) 4-month old landfarming site; (e) 10-month old landfarming site; and (f) 14-month old landfarming site. Fragment sizes, in base pair lengths, are shown at the top of each profile, while peak heights are shown as fluorescent units. Only the blue (shown as grey) 5¢-FAM-labelled T-RFs are shown. The peaks with the same fragment size in base pairs are labelled with the same peak number (p1–p31) and indicate characteristic T-RFs of OTUs detected in T-RFLP profiles. 174 non-polluted control site, over the whole treatment period, were distinct from those of the contaminated landfarming site and were relatively unchanged from each other. Each T-RF peak in the community profiles indicates a different sequence type and was used as an OTU, with an approximate resolution level able to differentiate bacterial genera (Osborn et al. 2000). ‘TU’ is a term, derived from numerical taxonomy and generally applied to strain, species or genus or other taxonomic entity which may not necessarily be defined. With the growing application of nucleic acid sequence data for assessing microbial diversity, etc., the term is used to define a sequence type that is distinct. The exact taxonomic classification of the sequence type may not be able to be defined with certainty. 