EK6 (Katsivela et al. 2003a, b). In order to assess the importance of members of the genera Alcaligenes, Enterobacter and Ochrobactrum the abundances of the characteristic T-RFs of these genera was monitored in the T-RFLP profiles of the six soil samples. Figure 4 shows the T-RFLPs of AluI restriction digested 16S rDNA of: (a) the nonpolluted control soil; (b) the fresh refinery waste sludge; and (c) the landfarming soil after 4 months; (d) after 10 months: and (e) after 14 months treatment; as well as (f) Alcaligenes sp. EK5. For this T-RFLP analysis we used both the 5¢ as well as the 3¢ T-RFs that are shown as blue and green peaks, respectively. The characteristic T-RFs of the genus Alcaligenes were present in the community T-RFLP fingerprint of the non-polluted control soil, as well as in that of the 10-month old treated soil (Figure 4). On the other hand, the characteristic T-RFs of the genera Enterobacter and Ochrobactrum were abundant in the T-RFLP fingerprints of the landfarmed soil over the whole treatment period of 14 months (compare T-RFLP profiles of the soil samples in Figure 4 with the T-RFLP profiles of Enterobacter spp. EK3.1 and EK4 and Ochrobactrum sp. EK6 in Figure 3 of the published data by Katsivela et al. 2003a). The T-RFs from the genus Figure 3. Relative abundance of the number of OTUs with different origin found in the four soil samples with different treatment history using T-RFLP analysis. 176 Ochrobactrum were also present in the T-RFLP fingerprint of the non-polluted control soil. The relative abundances of the genera Alcaligenes and Ochrobactrum in the non-polluted soil indicates their indigenous origin. In contrast, as described previously (Katsivela et al. 2004), Enterobacter belongs to the bacterial genera that were present only in the landfarmed soil samples. Alcaligenes appears in significant numbers only within the 10-month old landfarmed soil, whereas Ochrobactrum and Enterobacter were present in the landfarmed soil over the whole treatment period of 14 months. These differences in the relative abundances of these three bacterial genera may be related to their metabolic capabilities of utilisation of specific carbon sources as well as the chemical composition of the existing petroleum hydrocarbons in the landfarmed soils in the different sampling periods. Kaplan & Kitts (2004) reported also that specific phylotypes of bacteria were associated with the different phases of petroleum degradation in a land treatment unit. Figure 4. T-RFLPs of AluI restriction digested 16S rDNA, to assess the bacterial diversity of (a) untreated control soil; (b) refinery waste sludge; (c) 4-month old landfarmed soil; (d) 10-month old landfarmed soil; (e) 14-month old landfarmed soil; and (f) Alcaligenes sp. EK5. The arrows indicate the characteristic T-RFs of the genus Alcaligenes. Fragment sizes, in base pairs, are shown at the top of each profile, while peak heights are shown as fluorescent units. The red dye-labelled fragments indicate the GS500 DNA internal size standard, while 5¢ and 3¢ T-RFs are shown as blue and green peaks, respectively. 177 The authors showed also that the relative abundance of a phylotype associated with Alcaligenes increased only temporally during the bioremediation process. Detection of catabolic gene sequences by PCR DNA extracted from the soil samples: (a) an untreated, non-polluted control soil; (b) a newly produced refinery waste sludge; and (c) a landfarming site treated with refinery waste sludge, after 4 and 14 months treatment, were analysed by PCR with degenerate primers for the presence of genes encoding key enzymes in the degradation of petroleum hydrocarbons. Alkane hydroxylase AlkB, catechol 2,3-dioxygenase (subfamily I.2.A) and naphthalene dioxygenase nahAc were used as marker genes. 