The analysis of results seems to indicate that the effect of ethanol on the fate of gasoline compounds may actually be of concern: all the parameters monitored suggest a higher retention and a delayed degradation of BTEX in unsaturated porous medium when gasoline is amended with ethanol. When gasoline was introduced with ethanol, more BTEX were retained in unsaturated inert soil; natural attenuation of gasoline compounds in undisturbed soil took longer, as shown by chemical analysis of residues; microbial degrading activities were much higher and longer lasting in ethanol-containing soils; unspecialised culturable bacteria, unable to grow under high amounts of contaminants, resumed growth much later than in gasoline-contamination situations. The co-solvency effect of ethanol on BTEX and its high solubility in water seem to cause a higher retention of BTEX in the soil matrix. The presence of gasoline and gasoline–ethanol mixtures in soil enhanced microbial enzymatic activity but suppressed culturable bacterial populations. The results presented here show the possibility of evaluating the impact caused by contamination as well as the reduction of soil toxicity by evaluating culturable bacterial populations. Bacterial counts showed a delay in soil populations’ reaction to contamination in gasoline–ethanol -contaminated soil when compared to gasoline-contaminated ones, which indicates a possible preferential degradation of ethanol. Microbial degrading activity, higher in soils contaminated with BTEX–ethanol, suggests it is a better tool to evaluate biodegradation activities than assessing microbial contingents, which only evaluates shifts in numbers of culturable populations. However, counts of culturable populations may be useful to rapidly assess soil toxicity due to contamination. Contamination persists longer in unsaturated soil when in the presence of ethanol. Still, additional and more accurate chemical analyses are necessary to better evaluate contaminant residue in soil and measure its persistence up to its effect on microbial populations, especially culturable bacteria. However, the possibility that ethanol may delay BTEX degradation should not invalidate its use as a fuel and/or gasoline oxygenated additive; its positive effects on atmospheric pollution are undeniable as well as its value as an alternative to fossil fuels. Studies to further verify degradation processes are necessary so as to determine adequate approaches to address spills of gasoline–ethanol mixtures that could bypass eventual negative effects of ethanol. Acknowledgements The authors acknowledge Tácio Mauro Pereira de Campos for his contribution to this work; Márcio R. Miranda, Alessandra O.C. Dupont, Amaury C. Fraga and the team of the Environmental Geotechnics Laboratory for assistance with field and experimental work; and the team of the Fuel Laboratory. This study was funded by CNPq, Faperj and PRONEX. 