The average amount introduced was 192.9 g. Contaminant progression and distribution in the medium was then filmed and photographed and effluents collected to be quantified and analysed. Contaminants were analysed as described in paragraph Section 2.1.3.1. Microbiological analyses detected the initial impact of contamination on culturable bacterial populations as well as the stimulation of metabolic activity caused by contamination. Growth of culturable bacteria was inhibited by gasoline as well as by ethanol-blended gasoline contamination (Fig. 2), and resumed only when contaminant amounts were reduced (Fig. 3). The recovery of culturable populations occurred 40 days following contamination, while for gasoline–ethanol -contaminated soils, it was not observed until after the 65th day. This delayed recovery of culturable populations in soils containing ethanol-amended gasoline suggests a longer-lasting toxicity of soil when the contaminating gasoline is blended with ethanol. In contaminated soils, the presence of contaminants increased microbial activity, probably because of biodegrading activities; the stimulation was higher and longer lasting when gasoline was introduced blended with ethanol (Fig. 4). BTEX-contaminated soils present a 50% increase in activity on the second day after contamination; levels then drop below the initial values, suggesting that the population must re-adapt to the new conditions. Ethanol-containing soils also have an increased activity on the second day (>2.5 times the initial level). This activity lasts until the 10th day, gradually dropping. An initial immediate degradation of ethanol was possibly followed by the degradation of BTEX, indicated by lower levels of activity, similar, on the fifth day after contamination, to those observed in gasoline-contaminated soils on the second day. As shown by residue analysis, gasoline compounds were detected for a longer time in soils contaminated with ethanol mixtures (Fig. 5). It was not possible in these studies to link soil recovery, as shown by resumption of growth of culturable bacteria and the return of activity to initial levels, to threshold levels of contamination. However, measurements of degrading activities of the microbiota decreased rapidly once contamination residues were no longer detected (Figs. 4 and 5b). In sterile soils where microbial communities were eliminated by autoclaving, chemical analysis showed that BTEX residues persisted in both gasoline- and gasoline–ethanol -contaminated soils whereas they were no longer detected in non-sterile soils (Fig. 5b). Gravimetric monitoring of water and gasoline volatilisation from uncontaminated and contaminated soils showed that most water and contaminant volatilisation happened rapidly during the first hours after the introduction of contaminants into soil. No significant difference was observed in gasoline- and gasoline–ethanol -contaminated soils (Fig. 6). Contaminated sterile and dry soils showed between 5 and 10% weight loss in the first day of the assay, the weight remaining constant afterwards until the 20th day. These experiments showed that, despite ethanol's higher volatility, volatilisation of contaminants did not seem faster when gasoline was blended with ethanol. Experiments with inert soil presented two-phase effluents when gasoline was introduced blended with ethanol; the upper phase, A, was composed mainly of gasoline compounds, while the bottom phase, B, was aqueous. This phenomenon was not observed when gasoline alone was the contaminant: in this case a unique phase was observed (A), mainly of gasoline compounds (Fig. 7). 