The relative T-RF abundances of representative phylotypes were determined based on the relative peak areas of the corresponding T-RF. Results Bacterial community associated with lava granules The lava granules were taken from a column in which benzene is mineralized with sulfate as an electron acceptor (Vogt et al., 2007). A 16S rRNA gene clone library of 814 clones was generated from DNA isolated from the lava granules and screened by ARDRA fingerprinting. Based on a hierarchical cluster analysis, 29 clones representing eight dominant operational taxonomic units (OTUs) were selected for partial sequencing. The numbers of clones representing the identified phylotypes (i.e. displaying identical ARDRA patterns) were recorded using a Phoretix database that has been set up from the ARDRA patterns. In total 31% of the clones were assigned. The phylogenetic composition of the consortium according to these data is shown in Fig. 1. The dominant phylotype comprising 18.2% of all clones was a member of the genus Magnetobacterium (phylum Nitrospira). The second-most prominent phylotype with a proportion of 6.1% (Fig. 1) was a clostridium belonging to the Desulfotomaculum cluster I of the Peptococcaceae, which also comprises the genera Cryptanaerobacter and Pelotomaculum. The phylogenetic position of the clostridial clones within the Desulfotomaculum cluster I is illustrated in Fig. 2. Deltaproteobacteria were found in low frequency, with only 2.3% of all clones belonging to the genus Desulfobacca and 1.7% belonging to the genus Syntrophus (Fig. 1). The phylogenetic relationship of these sequences with other Deltaproteobacteria is shown in Fig. 3. According to the phylogenetic analyses using the arb program, the other identified phylotypes comprising only minor proportions of the clone library were affiliated to the phyla Chloroflexi, Chlorobi and Fusobacteria (data not shown). Bacterial community derived from sand microcosms Several anaerobic benzene-degrading enrichment cultures (named ZzBs1-4) were established under sulfate-reducing conditions in laboratory microcosms using sand particles as inoculum taken from the benzene-degrading column system described elsewhere (Vogt et al., 2007). As shown in Fig. 4, 0.24 mM benzene was consumed within 1100 h (46 days) coupled with sulfide production. It was not possible to grow a sediment-free culture of ZzBs1-4; instead, the cells were attached to the sand particles as confirmed by microscopic observation. After the cells were detached by pyrophosphate or gentle mechanical treatment, the cultures no longer degraded benzene (data not shown). A 16S rRNA gene clone library of 1121 clones was generated from the consortium. Based on the cluster analysis of ARDRA patterns, 91 clones representing 36 OTUs were partially sequenced. The numbers of clones displaying identical ARDRA patterns were recorded with the phoretix program; as a result, about 51% of the clones were assigned. The phylogenetic composition of the consortium is shown in Fig. 1. 