Experiments by Huesemann (23) on the limits and extent of bioremediating TPH in different oily soils showed that 90% of the alkanes and monocyclic saturates and 50−70% of aromatic compounds (<C44) were degraded. The significance of this work is that overall bioremediation effectiveness was dependent upon hydrocarbon types present and was not affected as much by soil type, nutrient fertilizer addition, microbial populations, or treatment conditions (slurry versus static soil conditions). It was also shown that saturate and aromatic compounds with polycyclic structures were most resistant to removal by enhanced soil biotreatment methods. The apparent recalcitrance of petroleum hydrocarbon fractions may be due to factors such as lack of bioavailability (inaccessible because of soil sorption and uptake by soil microbes), lack of requisite oxidizing enzymes, and/or steric hindrance for enzyme attack and toxicity to soil microorganisms. Currently, there are no universal TPH cleanup standards that have been adopted by federal or state regulatory agencies for soils contaminated with fresh or weathered crude oils. State guidelines developed mainly for oil product (e.g., gasoline, diesel, and other middle distillate fuels) spills to surface or subsurface soils have varying remediation end points such as 10−10 000 mg/kg TPH and 0.1−500 mg/kg BTEX, cleanup to background levels, or allow the use of risk-based criteria coupled to environmental fate and effects (24). Based on our current understanding of bioremediation of crude oil-impacted soils, it would be difficult to achieve those low cleanup levels at most sites containing varying types of residual, weathered petroleum hydrocarbons. Doyle and Sweet (25) have suggested that soil remediation standards should be based upon the BTEX components in crude oil and oil products (fuels)-impacted soils since these are the most mobile (leachable) hydrocarbons that could be transported to groundwater. Ecologically relevant criteria for estimating the impacts of oil hydrocarbons in soils are also important end points for risk assessment. In this respect, ecotoxicity bioassays such as seed germination and plant growth have been used for monitoring treatment effects and restoration of oiled land sites (26−29). Plant species have been proposed as indicators of soil quality and toxicity of leachable constituents in assessing damage and risk to impacted ecosystems (30, 31). There have been relatively few studies, however, describing the effects of oil hydrocarbons on soil-dwelling invertebrates such as earthworms, nematodes, other polychaetes and microarthropods (32−34). Earthworms have been used to evaluate the effects of chemicals and contaminated soils on animal survival, growth, and reproduction (35−39). Another factor in ecorisk evaluation of oily soils is the potential for dissolution and leaching of water-soluble aromatic hydrocarbons like benzene, toluene, ethylbenzene, and xylenes (BTEX) into the vadose zone and groundwater environments. Laboratory soil microcosm experiments and field investigations in aquifers have been used to study hydrocarbon source migration from oil and fuel spills (40−42). Fate and transport methodologies have been developed to validate those natural attenuation factors (e.g., inherent biodegradation of hydrocarbons in groundwater, evaporation rates from spills, and soil sorption/desorption rates) governing the dissolution and dispersion of petroleum compounds into the subsurface (40, 43−45). Clearly, the integration of chemical analysis, ecotoxicity, and remediation potential data is required to properly assess ecological risk in the management of crude oil-impacted soils. In the present laboratory study, we compared the biotreat ability of three artificially weathered crude oils (heavy, medium, and light) in soils with high or low organic carbon content using traditional land treatment techniques. Soil samples taken before, during, or after bioremediation were evaluated for TPH content, hydrocarbon composition changes, earthworm survival, seed germination and plant growth, Microtox inhibition, and hydrocarbon and metal leaching potential. Our data demonstrate the effectiveness of bioremediation techniques in reducing hydrocarbon levels, eliminating acute soil toxicity, and reducing leaching of water-soluble aromatic compounds (BTEX). Materials and Methods Test Soils and Crude Oils. The effects of hydrocarbon bioremediation on soil toxicity was investigated in two soils with high (4.6%, Norwood/Baccto) and low (0.3%, Norwood) organic matter to which were added three different crude oils of API gravity (measured at 60 °C) 14 (heavy), 30 (medium), and 55 (light). The distribution (%) of saturated/aromatic/polar fractions in the heavy, medium, and light oils was 20.3/28.9/44.1, 56.4/23.7/14.7, and 86.7/6.4/0.7, respectively. Total BTEX concentrations were 1735, 15 140, and 36 100 mg/kg, respectively, in the heavy, medium, and light oils. The predominant polyaromatic hydrocarbons (PAH) naphthalene and phenanthrene were present at combined levels of 180, 460, and 960 mg/kg in the heavy, medium, and light oils, respectively. PAH with four or more rings were present at or below the quantitative detection limit (≤20 mg/kg). Metal analysis of the crude oils indicated that Ni, V, and Zn were present in the heavy and light crudes at 99, 130, and 450 mg/kg, respectively (data not shown). Most other metals (e.g., As, B, Cr, Cu, Hg, Mo, Pb, and Se) were <20 mg/kg. The Norwood soil used in these studies was obtained from the surface (6 in. 