To assess both the potential of bioremediation in a heavily PAH-contaminated soil and the effects of different treatments on the bacterial community structure, we used a series of bioremediation treatments in microcosm experiments. An old, loamy clay soil that was heavily contaminated with PAH-creosote (∼8,000 mg total petroleum hydrocarbon [TPH] kg of soil−1, including 2,700 mg resolved PAH kg of soil−1) was subjected to different treatments. Degradation of the PAHs and TPH of creosote was monitored. The bacterial community was studied by culture-independent analysis of 16S rRNA genes by means of DGGE (25) and determination of the most probable number (MPN) of heterotrophs and PAH degraders in the microbial population (39). Previous Section Next Section MATERIALS AND METHODS Soil analysis.A composite sample of creosote-contaminated soil (50 kg) from a wood treatment plant near Barcelona, Spain, was obtained from the top 20 cm and sieved (<6 mm). The soil texture was determined by sedimentation analysis (16). The primary dissolved inorganic constituents of a saturated paste extract (nitrate, nitrite, ammonia, phosphorus) were determined using ion chromatography (30). The soil moisture content, water-holding capacity (WHC), electrical conductivity, total organic carbon content, total nitrogen content, and pH were determined as described previously (30). Seven different treatments in microcosms experiments designated 1M to 7M were used in the study, as shown in Table 1. To determine the best soil water content for use in the microcosm experiments, five different water contents (5%, 20%, 40%, 60%, and 75% WHC) and autoclaved soil as an abiotic control were assayed for 15 days in triplicate in miniaturized microcosms with the nutrient additions described in Table 1. The best results (P < 0.05) were observed with 40% and 60% WHC (22 to 27% biodegradation of TPH), while with 20% and 75% WHC only slight biodegradation was observed (14%). Untreated soil (5% WHC) did not show significant biodegradation (P > 0.05). Thus, water content was established as a key factor for biodegradation activity, and 40% WHC was defined as the optimal water content for soil microcosm experiments. View this table: In this window In a new window TABLE 1. Soil treatments Chemical, microbial, and molecular analyses were carried out on sampling days 0, 21, 45, 90, 135, and 200. At each sampling time, 30 g of soil was extracted as a composite sample from five points in each microcosm and stored at −20°C prior to most analyses; the only exception was microbial counting, which was performed immediately after sampling. Monitoring the concentrations of total petroleum hydrocarbon and polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons.Samples were dried for 16 h at room temperature and sieved (<2 mm). Before extraction, an orthoterphenyl acetone solution was added to 2 g of sieved, dried soil as a surrogate internal standard. The spiked sample was extracted five times in an ultrasonic bath (15 min for each extraction) with 10 ml of dichloromethane-acetone (1:1, vol/vol), and the extracts were combined to obtain the total organic extract. The extracts were dried over Na2SO4 and concentrated in a rotary evaporator to dryness. The TPH fraction was obtained with an alumina chromatographic column using the EPA3611 method (U.S. Environmental Agency). The TPH fraction and the PAHs were analyzed by gas chromatography with flame ionization detection using a Trace 2000 gas chromatograph (Thermo Quest, Milan, Italy) as described previously (1). Before this, a set of samples was analyzed by gas chromatography with a mass detector to verify the purity of the peaks analyzed by gas chromatography with flame ionization detection (data not shown). Final TPH and PAH concentrations were calculated using standard calibration curves for TPH and each PAH. Monitoring of heterotrophic and hydrocarbon-degrading microbial populations.Total heterotrophic and PAH-degrading microbial population counts were determined on days 0, 21, 45, 90, 135, and 200 using a miniaturized most-probable-number (MPN) technique as described previously (39). DNA extraction.Soil samples for DNA extraction were collected from each microcosm on days 0, 21, 45, 90, 135, and 200 in sterile Eppendorf tubes and stored at −20°C prior to analysis. Total community DNA was extracted from all soil microcosms following a bead beating protocol using an Ultraclean DNA soil extraction kit (MoBio Laboratories, Inc., Solano Beach, CA). Suitable yields of high-molecular-weight DNA (5 to 20 μg g of soil−1) were obtained. An additional purification step with a Clean DNA Wizard kit (Promega, Madison, WI) was employed to avoid PCR inhibition. 