The research site used in the present study has a history of oil pollution due to accidental spills and previous oil spill experiments (30). Therefore, an oil-degrading community may already have been established and active at Stert Flats, and no changes in community structure may have been required in order to express the degradation potential. It is also possible that changes in community structure as the result of oil pollution and bioremediation treatment were too small to be detected by our PCR-DGGE approach and statistical analysis. The occurrence of significant, lasting changes in bacterial community composition in plots treated with slow-release fertilizer appears to contradict the idea that the Stert Flats sediments harbored an already established bacterial community in the oil-treated plots that received no fertilizer or were treated with liquid fertilizer, since one might expect that the same communities would be responsible for hydrocarbon degradation in the plots treated with slow-release fertilizer. However, in the plots treated with slow-release fertilizer the nutrient concentrations were greater than the concentrations in the other plots. Degradation of beached oil is in general limited by the supply of N and P (3, 28). The observed stimulation of oil degradation by nutrient amendment in this study, as well as in previous laboratory experiments (21), indicates that this is also the case for our field site. Resource ratio theory predicts that different communities are selected as the result of competition for limiting resources (31). The outcome of competition is determined by differences in species-specific substrate affinity, the maximum growth rate, and the mortality rate. Therefore, the sustained higher nutrient concentrations present in the plots containing slow-release fertilizer granules may have resulted in selection of a bacterial community that differed from that in the other oil-treated plots. It is unlikely that the differences in community structure between the plots treated with slow-release fertilizer and the other plots were due to growth of bacteria on the oleophilic coating of the slow-release fertilizer granules. The slow-release fertilizer was added to the oil-treated plots in mesh bags and thus was physically separated from the oil-treated sediment that was sampled for analysis. Also, the hulls of the granules remained in the mesh bags after the nutrients had been lost from the granules. Furthermore, a population of bacteria closely related to A. borkumensis (99.9% similarity) developed quickly in the plots treated with slow-release fertilizer, and significant carbon dioxide production occurred in these plots, but the type strain of A. borkumensis (DSM 11573) was unable to grow with the fertilizer granules as a sole source of carbon (data not shown). The statistical analysis performed in our study showed that there were clear differences in bacterial community structure in the plots treated with slow-release fertilizer, both in time and between different blocks. Sometimes even within plots significant variation was observed. The reasons for these differences are not understood, since the plots were treated with the same amount of slow-release fertilizer. However, they may be related to heterogeneity in the beach sediments; similar observations were made in a randomized block bioremediation experiment on the shoreline of Delaware (17), although in that study community patterns were not analyzed in a rigorous statistical manner. Also, the addition of the slow-release fertilizer to the plots in single mesh bags may have resulted in an uneven release of nutrients and a heterogeneous distribution in the oil-contaminated beach sediment. This factor probably contributed to heterogeneity in bacterial communities between blocks and within plots. However, in replicate microcosms containing homogenized Stert Flat beach sediment and treated with the same amount of liquid fertilizer, clear variation in community structure was observed (21). Therefore, besides heterogeneity in nutrient levels and sediment, other unknown factors may have contributed to heterogeneity in bacterial communities in plots treated with slow-release fertilizer. Our results clearly indicate that it may not be sufficient to sample a single location when the bacterial community structure of oil-contaminated shorelines is studied (19). It has been suggested that restoration of the bacterial community structure to a state similar to that present prior to pollution could be used as a parameter for determination of the ecological end point of bioremediation (26). For this study, such a measure may have been of little value; in the plot treated with slow-release fertilizer in block 1, the bacterial community structure after 315 days was comparable to the prepollution community structure, while considerable amounts of oil, especially polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons, remained. Also, the community structure in the oil-treated plots that received no fertilizer or were treated with liquid fertilizer could in general not be distinguished from that in non-oil-treated plots, despite the presence of oil and the occurrence of significant oil degradation. In conclusion, the randomized block experiment showed that biodegradation of buried oil is stimulated by addition of nutrients, either in a liquid form or in a solid form. The relationship between community structure and degradation appears to be complex since communities with similar structures showed different rates of degradation, while communities with different structures showed similar degrees of degradation. 