Although most of the new sequences support the proposed tertiary interactions, some do not show canonical covariation in the pair at bp 504 and 526 (U-C in WCHB1-07 and WCHB1-26 and A-G in OPd16). As mentioned above, these changes in this otherwise universal sequence compromise positions 515 to 533 as a universal primer target for obtaining rRNA genes from the environment. Physiological hypotheses.Environmental rDNA sequences, in principle, can be used to infer some properties of the organisms that they represent. If a sequence is related to those of a group of cultivated organisms with common properties, then the environmental organism represented only by the sequence also is expected to have those properties. One barrier to deriving physiological hypotheses from this study is that many of the sequences are not specifically related to cultivated organisms. Indeed, the numerically dominant sequence types in the bacterial and universal libraries from methanogenic soil in this study are members of newly recognized candidate divisions, OP11 and OP5, for which no cultivated representatives are known. Nothing is known about the physiology of these bacteria, since they are defined only by sequences obtained from the environment. Any physiological interpretations must therefore rely heavily on the environmental conditions of a sample from which a sequence is isolated. Based on environmental chemistry, Hugenholtz et al. (18) speculated that organisms in a Yellowstone hot spring represented by OP11 sequences may engage in sulfate reduction. Of course, many organisms that are closely related by 16S rRNA genes have different physiologies; energy metabolism, for instance, can be highly variable in evolution (30). Some of the sequences encountered at the Wurtsmith site, however, are related sufficiently closely to studied organisms that reasonable physiological hypotheses can be formulated. Two of the most abundant sequence types in this study represent members of phylogenetic groups with consistent modes of energy metabolism. Sequence WCHD3-03, representing 8% of the universal library and 81% of the archaeal library created from methanogenic zone soil, is 97% identical to the archaeon Methanosaeta concilii and monophyletic with the two known Methanosaeta spp. (Fig. 3g). The only recognized form of energy production in this genus is aceticlastic methanogenesis (47), indicating that the archaeon represented by the WCHD3-03 sequence also engages in aceticlastic methanogenesis. Sequence WCHB1-12, representing 8% of the universal library created from methanogenic zone soil, is 96% identical to the SSU rDNA ofSyntrophus gentianae and monophyletic withSyntrophus spp., to the exclusion of all other δ-Proteobacteria (Fig. 3a). Syntrophus spp. obtain energy from the anaerobic oxidation of organic acids to acetate and hydrogen (46), suggesting a similar metabolic capability for the environmental bacteria represented by sequence WCHB1-12.S. gentianae and M. concilii recently were shown to interact syntrophically in a triculture with Methanospirillum hungatei or Desulfovibrio desulfuricans (for hydrogen removal). The utilization of benzoate by S. gentianae was greatly increased by the presence ofM. concilii and the consequent removal of acetate, as was thermodynamically predicted (35). A similar syntrophic association between the organisms represented by sequences WCHD3-03 and WCHB1-12 seems possible (see below). Although the relatively high levels of theseSyntrophus-related and Methanosaeta-related sequences in the methanogenic zone libraries are consistent with the significant involvement of the corresponding organisms in methanogenic hydrocarbon degradation, potential quantitative biases inherent in the clonal library approach must be recognized. These biases include potential variability in rDNA copy number, cell lysis, DNA extraction, PCR, and cloning (2, 10, 33, 41). Quantitative assessments of microbial distribution are better made directly, for instance, by use of whole-cell in situ rDNA probes or quantitative hybridization to extracted RNA (2). In the few studies that have compared PCR-based clone libraries with other methods, however, the correspondence is good (11, 12, 38). 