Saturated hydrocarbons are quantitatively the most abundant fraction among all petroleum hydrocarbons. Significant advances have been made in the understanding of the anaerobic biodegradability of alkanes in terms of the microorganisms involved and the biochemical pathways over the past two decades. They can be used as carbon and energy sources by diverse physiological groups of microorganisms (isolates or consortia) grown under chlorate-reducing, nitrate-reducing, sufidogenic or methanogenic conditions. Two general biochemical mechanisms have been proposed for the initial activation of alkanes including addition of fumarate and carboxylation. However, glycyl radical enzymes dependent fumarate addition which yields alkyl-substituted succinate appear to be the most commonly shared mechanism for the anaerobic attack of alkanes under various redox conditions by phylogenetically diverse microorganisms. The genes encoding the candidate alkylsuccinate synthase have been recently described in alkane-degrading sulfate- and nitrate-reducers as well as in hydrocarbon-rich environments. Alternative mechanisms may also be available depending on the alkane-degrading microbial community and electron acceptors utilized. Petroleum (crude oil) is a complex mixture that contains thousands of distinctively different chemical components, but mainly hydrocarbon. Hydrocarbon composition of crude oil can be separated into four main fractions; namely saturated hydrocarbons, aromatic, resins and asphaltenes. These compounds are relatively less reactive due to the lack of functional groups and low water solubility. Nevertheless, microorganisms can grow with hydrocarbons as the sole source of carbon and energy coupled with different electron acceptors. However, the initial attack of hydrocarbons remains the critical step for the subsequent metabolism of these apolar substrates. Furthermore, the incorporation of molecular oxygen into the hydrocarbon molecules by the activity of oxygenases in the initial step is a strictly oxygen-dependent biochemical process and energetically favorable (Chakraborty and Coates, 2004 ; Wentzel et al., 2007). However, biodegradation of hydrocarbons in the absence of molecular oxygen is often hindered by the chemical inertness of the carbon–carbon bonds. Obviously, microorganisms capable of anaerobic biodegradation of hydrocarbons must have developed alternative, oxygen-independent biochemical reactions and the required enzymes for the initial attack of these substrates under oxygen-limited conditions. Today, anaerobic degradation of hydrocarbons remains an interesting area of research for understanding the mechanisms of petroleum biodegradation in oil reservoirs, and for bioremediation of oil-contaminated environments. Major attention has recently been paid to the microbial ecology of petroleum reservoirs, where anaerobes are the dominant microorganisms (Magot et al., 2000; Röling et al., 2003 ; Li et al., 2007). Isolation and/or characterization of such microorganisms are of great importance for understanding of the biochemical mechanisms responsible for oil biodegradation in natural environments and in petroleum reservoirs. The anaerobic biodegradability of hydrocarbons has been investigated since the 1940s, however, the biodegradation/biotransformation of these compounds in the absence of molecular oxygen was conclusively demonstrated only about two decades ago via methanogenesis of toluene and benzene (Vogel and Grbic-Galic, 1986 ; Grbic-Galic and Vogel, 1987). Later on, toluene was shown to be completely oxidized to CO2 by pure cultures of the Fe(III)-reducing Geobacter metallireducens strain GS-15 ( Lovley et al. 1989). These studies led the way to the isolation and characterization of novel microorganisms capable of oxidizing a diverse range of hydrocarbons under the dominant terminal electron accepting processes occurring under anoxic environments including sulfate, nitrate, oxidized metals – such as iron(III) and manganese(IV) – and CO2 ( Heider et al., 1999; Widdel and Rabus, 2001 ; Chakraborty and Coates, 2004). Biodegradation of alkanes in anoxic environments has been for years a subject of debate only at the theoretical level. The first experimental demonstration of this hypothesis was accomplished by the quantitative measurement of the consumption of n-alkanes by sulfate-reducing bacteria ( Aeckersberg et al. 1991). Since then, sulfate-, nitrate- and chlorate-reducing bacteria grown anaerobically with saturated hydrocarbons as the sole carbon and energy sources have been demonstrated. Furthermore, the isolated anaerobic alkane-degrading microorganisms were not closely related to previously established species, e.g., Desulfovibrio or Pseudomonas strains, and revealed novel species or genera ( Aeckersberg et al., 1991; Aeckersberg et al., 1998 ; Ehrenreich et al., 2000). In addition, anaerobic biodegradation of alkanes has also been supported with enriched microbial communities utilizing sulfate ( Kropp et al., 2000; Gieg and Suflita, 2002 ; Savage et al., 2010) and nitrate ( Bregnard et al., 1997 ; Callaghan et al., 2009) as the terminal electron acceptor, or under methanogenic conditions ( Zengler et al., 1999; Anderson and Lovley, 2000; Gieg et al., 2008 ; Jones et al., 2008). The main scope of this review lies on the diversity and physiology of microorganisms capable of anaerobic degradation of alkanes under nitrate, sulfidogenic, chlorate and methanogenic conditions. 