As a result, 95% and 41% of valid sequences were assigned to novel (type (i)) clusters. Although we designed the primers using only toluene/biphenyl dioxygenase, it is interesting that the deeper sequencing allowed us to obtain a much broader range of apparent dioxygenase genes. For example, clusters F24 and R5 contain all well-known toluene/biphenyl dioxygenase genes and clusters F35 and R7 contain all well-known naphthalene dioxygenase genes (Supplementary Figure S2 and Supplementary Table S1). This provides a perspective on the size of clusters with and without reference sequences and hence on the diversity of the novel dioxygenase genes. The detection of novel conserved residues, such as the seven found in this study, illustrates one of the useful outputs from the GT-metagenomics approach, in that it better reveals what nature has selected, which cannot be observed from either pure culture or shotgun metagenomics approaches. On the basis of earlier reports, six out of the seven residues have not been studied for their structural or functional importance for Rieske nonheme iron dioxygenase genes such as biphenyl dioxygenase (Furusawa et al., 2004), cumene dioxygenase (Dong et al., 2005) or naphthalene dioxygenase (Karlsson et al., 2003). However, this high conservation ratio suggests that they have some structural or functional role and hence provide new targets for site-directed mutagenesis studies. Moreover, those novel conserved regions allow us to design new primer sets to explore further diversity of genes. The larger challenge in GT-metagenomics is data analysis. We tested several approaches. First, we selected a representative sequence from each 0.6 distance cluster on the basis of amino-acid sequences and tried to build a phylogenetic tree. However, those sequences were too diverse to produce a reliable tree (the bootstrap values were very low). We then tried a model approach to show the distribution of pyrosequenced sequences against known genes. The model approach is used to search and create databases on the basis of the relatedness to a certain group of functional genes, such as by FGPR. We built two protein models on the basis of a set of known dioxygenase genes in the toluene/biphenyl family, and a set of all well-known Rieske nonheme iron dioxygenase genes, which includes toluene/biphenyl, naphthalene, benzoate and phthalate families. The valid sequences were searched against those models using Hidden Markov Model, and scores of each sequence to the model were calculated. Only 68% of valid sequences had scores to either of the models for BPHD-f3 sequences. In contrast, 100% of valid BPHD-r1 sequences had scores to either one of the models. This might be because the model was based on known genes and could not give similarity scores to the completely novel genes. The advantage of this method is that we can compare sequences on the basis of the score to the model, regardless of region and length. When there is enough reference gene information, for example, by adding new clusters obtained in this and other studies, to provide a more stable model, the model approach will be a useful method to map and compare sequences obtained from different regions of the gene. The most abundant cluster in BPHD-r1 sequences was the novel (type (i)) cluster with 48% of total valid sequences (Figure 3). However, there is no such large type (i) cluster in BPHD-f3. In the same manner, we found differences between BPHD-f3 and BPHD-r1 clustering in terms of the proportion of clusters in each type. This suggests a further complexity of environmental dioxygenases composed of different combinations of those clusters in one gene. Advances in sequencing technology that provide greater read length, such as the recently introduced GS FLX Titanium Series, which can extend read length to 400–500 bp (http://www.454.com/), will be a great help with GT-metagenomics approaches. A this GT-metagenomics approach is based on PCR products, it, similar to all PCR-based approaches, should be assumed to have primer bias and cannot be comprehensive or reflect actual quantification. It can, however, reveal much more sequence information about the genes it does recover and hence more insight into what nature has produced. Functional genes often have less conserved regions and the current sequenced length is less than desired. 