Somewhat later, involvement of a glycyl radical was also found in class III RNR [79]. Benzylsuccinate synthase presents a third class of glycyl radical enzymes. The activating enzymes of PFL and RNR generate the glycyl radical via cleavage of S-adenosylmethionine by one-electron reduction, yielding methionine and an adenosyl radical: the adenosyl radical abstracts a hydrogen atom from a glycine residue leading to the formation of a glycyl radical (i.e., H-CO- in the polypeptide chain). The glycyl radical is supposed to be a storage radical which then generates a thiyl radical as the reactive form. Assuming that the organic radical in anaerobic toluene and alkane activation (see above) is also initiated with S-adenosylmethionine, the unifying mechanistic scheme depicted in Fig. 7 can be postulated. RNA analysis demonstrated that the expression of genes related to benzylsuccinate formation are induced by toluene and confirmed their previously observed arrangement in an operon 76. ;. In both strains of T. aromatica, genes were identified that exhibited significant sequence homology to sensor/regulator proteins of two-component systems and were suggested to function in the regulation of toluene metabolism 81. ; 82.. The promotor controlling transcription of the operon with the genes involved in benzylsuccinate metabolism in T. aromatica was recently identified. Benzylsuccinate is further metabolized, somewhat in analogy to the β-oxidation of fatty acids, to acetyl-CoA and benzoyl-CoA 74. ;. Benzoyl-CoA undergoes reductive dearomatization and ring cleavage followed by reactions that again resemble those in the β-oxidation of fatty acids [84]. The substrate range of the benzylsuccinate-forming activity was tested with partially purified benzylsuccinate synthase from Azoarcus strain T and found to include xylenes, fluorotoluenes and the alkene, 1-methyl-1-cyclohexene [5]. Xylenes and p-cymene Among the alkylbenzenes with two or more alkyl substituents, xylenes (dimethylbenzenes) are the most relevant ones found in oil and as chemicals. Several strains that can degrade toluene can also grow with m-xylene 5.; 58.; 60.; 62.; 63. ; 67.. Furthermore, the degradation of higher homologues has also been observed, among which p-isopropyltoluene is a wide-spread plant hydrocarbon [12]. There is evidence that anaerobic degradation of m-xylene proceeds, in analogy to that of toluene, via m-methylbenzylsuccinate ( Fig. 6b) to m-methylbenzoyl-CoA 5. ; 85.. Further degradation of m-methylbenzoyl-CoA would be possible by reactions analogous to those of benzoyl-CoA, because the methyl group does not interfere with the reactions of a regular β-oxidation. Degradation of o-xylene and p-xylene, which appear to be poorly and rarely utilized by anaerobic bacteria 67. ; 86., may be also initiated by reaction with fumarate (Fig. 6b), the products being o-methylbenzoyl-CoA and p-methylbenzoyl-CoA, respectively. However, upon ring cleavage the methyl groups would prevent one round of regular β-oxidation and thus require additional mechanisms for complete substrate oxidation. Interestingly, p-isopropyltoluene is rapidly utilized by denitrifying strains [12], suggesting an effective mechanism to by-pass the blockage of β-oxidation after cleavage of the assumed intermediate p-isopropylbenzoyl-CoA. The capacities for p-cymene and toluene degradation in strain pCyN1 are specifically induced by the substrates [12]. Ethylbenzene and propylbenzene Denitrifying Azoarcus strains 62. ; 87. and a novel gas-vesicle-containing sulphate-reducing bacterium (Fig. 4; O Kniemeyer and F Widdel, unpublished results) have been shown to degrade ethybenzene anaerobically in pure cultures. Ethylbenzene oxidation by the denitrifiers is thought to proceed via dehydrogenation to 1-phenylethanol (Fig. 6e) and acetophenone, carboxylation and activation to yield 3-oxo-3-phenylpropionyl-CoA, and thiolytic cleavage to acetyl-CoA and benzoyl-CoA 5.; 62.; 87.; 88. ;. Ethylbenzene dehydrogenase, which produces (S)-1-phenylethanol in Azoarcus strains, was shown to be a new molybdenum/iron–sulphur/haem protein localised in the periplasm (O Kniemeyer and J Heider, personal communication). The natural electron acceptor is unknown. The capacity for ethylbenzene degradation was shown to be induced 88. ; 90.. 