RNA-based pyrosequence libraries cluster with the corresponding DNA-based library, in most cases, and are also spatially oriented with respect to oil presence. Fig. 4. View larger version: In this page In a new window Download as PowerPoint Slide FIG. 4. Multidimensional scaling plot of SSU rRNA pyrosequence libraries derived from oiled Pensacola Beach sands (black), clean Pensacola sands (gray), and pristine sands (gray) from St. George Island. Samples above the black line were obtained from gDNA extracts, while samples below the line were derived from total RNA extracts reverse transcribed using a bacterial SSU rRNA gene primer. Lowercase letters (a to e) indicate pyrosequence libraries derived from the same sand sample. Averaged Bray-Curtis distance is shown. Bubble size is relative to percent abundance of Alcanivorax-like OTU as assigned by the RDP classifier. Nearly all of the groups represented in our culture collection of oil-degrading bacteria were detected in pyrosequence libraries from oiled beach sands (Table 5). Alcanivorax spp., in particular, were shown to comprise the most abundant OTU in the pyrosequence libraries. Thus, the relative abundance of Alcanivorax OTU is overlaid on the NMDS plot, demonstrating a strong covariation with oil presence (Fig. 4). As a proxy for the metabolically active bacteria present in beach sands, RNA-based pyrosequence libraries were generated and compared to DNA-based libraries for four samples collected on July 2 and selected to represent a range in visual oil contamination (Fig. 5). RNA- and DNA-based libraries revealed similar patterns in community composition grouped at the class level, especially in the oiled samples. Members of the Gammaproteobacteria and Alphaproteobacteria were shown to dominate beach sand communities, regardless of oil presence (Fig. 5, Table 5). Alphaproteobacteria and Actinobacteria show a proportionately higher representation in the RNA-based libraries compared to the DNA-based in all samples. In the most heavily oiled sample, this increase in relative abundance of Alphaproteobacteria is due primarily to a single OTU in the family Rhodobacteraceae (Table 5). Fig. 5. View larger version: In this page In a new window Download as PowerPoint Slide FIG. 5. Phylum- and class-level phylogenetic analysis of RNA and DNA-based bacterial SSU rRNA pyrosequence libraries for Pensacola Beach sand samples collected on 2 July 2010. Previous Section Next Section DISCUSSION The overall goal of our research is to determine the environmental and ecological controls of hydrocarbon biodegradation under in situ conditions in coastal benthic environments impacted by the DH oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico. The oil degradation capacity of microbial populations in marine sediments is likely limited by stressors such as anoxia or nutrient starvation, as well as ecological interactions such as mutualistic production and exchange of biosurfactants between bacterial populations (27). Knowledge of bacterial community structure and the response of key microbial players in oil-contaminated environments provide a first glance at metabolic potential and the physiological mechanisms that might drive hydrocarbon degradation. 