(1995) were able to successfully probe for delta proteobacteria in some deep subsurface samples from an aquifer with low hydraulic conductivity. Desulfosporosinus meridiei could be detected in groundwater from the site by antibody probing and culture, but not by FISH probing. Given that Zarda et al. (1998) also showed a poor response by groundwater bacteria to FISH probing, its use for tracking cells in contaminated aquifers would appear to be problematic. Aromatic hydrocarbon attenuation in groundwater on the Swan coastal plain: Conclusions Sulfate-reduction is the major terminal electron accepting process for the intrinsic remediation of plumes of aromatic hydrocarbons on the Swan Coastal Plain. Although toluene degradation can occur under methanogenic conditions, methanogenesis does not play a significant role on the Swan Coastal Plain even after considerable sulfate depletion in the groundwater. Benzene can be degraded under sulfate-reducing conditions (Lovley et al. 1995) but this does not occur significantly in the Swan Coastal Plain aquifer. The reason for this is unknown. However, benzene is rapidly degraded in Swan Coastal Plain aquifer material under aerobic or nitrate-reducing conditions. As benzene does not show natural attenuation by microbial populations in the Swan Coastal Plain aquifer, high concentrations persist in groundwater for large distances down-gradient from a source of contamination. These findings have serious implications for the management of gasoline-contaminated sites on the Swan Coastal Plain, especially as groundwater supplies about 70% of water used in the area. It has proved difficult to define the microbial community structure responsible for the attenuation of plumes of aromatic hydrocarbons on the Swan Coastal Plain. FISH probing, which has yielded so much information on microbial communities in many environments, seems of little value in anaerobic groundwater environments. In closing, it seems prudent to recognize that understanding the identity and activity of microorganisms in the subsurface, and in all other habitats, is a major scientific challenge” (Madsen 2000). Intrinsic remediation of aromatic hydrocarbons in the vadose zone A second major exposure pathway for carcinogenic aromatic hydrocarbons from a contaminated subsurface is through vapour transport through the soil to the surface. It is not optimal to study this phenomenon in thin plumes that result from small point-source contamination from damaged or leaking underground storage tanks such as those that occur on the Swan Coastal Plain (Figure 2). Therefore the fate of hydrocarbon vapours has been studied on the Swan Coastal Plain at a refinery site where widespread LNAPL contamination over a large surface area of the shallow aquifer has occurred. The widespread contamination allows study of the transport and biodegradation of volatile hydrocarbons in the vertical plane without appreciable “edge effects” on the vapour transport from the groundwater table towards the surface. Soil gases at the field site The field site was a lightly grassed expanse that had experienced hydrocarbon groundwater contamination for probably more than 20 years. Residual LNAPL occurred at the groundwater-vadose interface, and free phase hydrocarbon accumulated in wells drilled in the study area. To enable the collection of gases from the soil profile, a number of multiport installations that consisted of bundles of 2-mm i.d. nylon tubes were installed at 0.25 m intervals to below the groundwater-soil interface in early 1999. Profiles of volatile hydrocarbons, mostly aromatic hydrocarbons [namely benzene, toluene, isomers of xylene, and 1,3,5-trimethylbenzene] and the soil gases oxygen and carbon dioxide, have been measured at the site over an annual cycle (Davis et al. 2000). The results from two of those profiles are shown in Figure 5. The profiles changed greatly on a seasonal basis, and the depth penetration of oxygen into the soil was highly dependent upon the water content in the soil profile (Davis et al. 2000). The Swan Coastal Plain receives little rain over the Australian summer, 162 mm from October to April, however, considerable precipitation occurs during the Australian winter months (609 mm from May to September). 