6 m). The wells were placed in 1984 and 1985 by the U.S. Geological Survey to delineate the nature and extent of hydrocarbon contamination and plume migration. Therefore, gasoline-degrading isolates obtained from groundwater samples in the present study were regarded as well-derived bacteria and not necessarily as true aquifer bacteria. Site characterization studies indicated that the groundwater is brackish (from seawater intrusion) and contains numerous gasoline hydrocarbons (unpublished data). Substituted aromatic hydrocarbons predominated at this site and were most concentrated in well 2 (Fig. 1) located approximately 10 m up-gradient from the spill origin. Concentrations of individual hydrocarbons typically ranged from 10 to 100 mg/liter in groundwater obtained from well 2 to less than 1.0 ,ug/liter in wells located along the periphery of the plume (e.g., well 7; unpublished data). Origins of isolates used in study. Origins of the 309 gasoline-degrading bacteria used in this study are listed in Table 1. A total of 220 isolates were directly subcultured from groundwater samples (as described below) from the eight observation wells (Fig. 1). An additional 30 isolates were subcultured from an enrichment culture inoculated with groundwater from well 30, and 59 isolates were recovered by direct subculture from aquifer core material obtained near well 30 (see below). As noted above, the gasoline-degrading isolates were regarded as well-derived rather than native aquifer bacteria, since aseptic drilling practices were not employed when observation wells were placed in 1984 and 1985. Eighteen of these isolates were included in growth tests used to determine catabolic groups (see Fig. 2). jet before and at intervals during drilling and also immediately prior to retrieval of the final core sample. The final core sample was extracted from the borehole, positioned above a sterile plastic container (diameter, 30 cm; 20-liter capacity), and abruptly released, completely plugging the container within about 0.1 s. The outermost 10 cm of the core was sheared away as the container was plugged. The container was sealed aseptically and transported to the laboratory for analysis. Collection of groundwater samples. Groundwater samples were obtained from observation wells by use of a manual bellows pump. The pump intake was connected by sterile tubing to a 1.27-cm-diameter polyvinylchloride sampling tube permanently installed in each observation well (to prevent cross-contamination of wells). A minimum of five residual well volumes of groundwater (30 to 40 liters) was pumped out of the well as a flush prior to sample collection. After flushing, a sterile 1-liter vacuum flask was placed between the polyvinylchloride sample tube and pump assembly by using sterile Tygon tubing and interconnectors. A 1-liter sample of groundwater was drawn into the flask, and this was dispensed aseptically into sterile plastic bottles (Nalgene). The samples were stored on ice and transported to the laboratory within 3 h of collection. Isolation of gasoline-degrading bacteria. Gasoline-degrading bacteria (aerobic and facultative) were isolated by diluting groundwater samples in sterile hydrocarbon minimal medium (HCMM2) and spread-plating 0. 1-ml aliquots onto HCMM2 agar plates. HCMM2 medium contained (per liter of distilled water) the following: 1.36 g of KH2PO4; 1.42 g of Na2HPO4; 0.5 g of KNO3; 2.38 g of (NH4)2SO4; 0.05 g of MgSO4 7H2O; 0.01 g of CaCI2; 2.86 mg of H3BO4; 1.54 mg of MnSO4. 