Several of the sequences possessed significant similarity to one another. Within the γ subdivision of the Proteobacteria, grouping with Xanthomonas, sequences A4, A5, and A14 showed approximately 97% similarity to one another, with A4 and A14 differing by only three nucleotides. In the group of sequences clustering with Arthrobacter (A2, K2, K3, K5 and K6), similarity of the complete cluster was greater than 95%. Nucleotide comparison within this cluster revealed that no two sequences were less than 97% homologous. There were two distinct groups within the Nocardioides cluster: A13 and A16, and A9, A18, and A19 which demonstrated similarity within the cluster of almost 100% and greater than 93%, respectively. Although both of these groupings showed the strongest matches to Nocardioides, there was a notable difference between the two clusters in the form of a 10-bp deletion in the A13–A16 grouping. The two sequences A11 and K11 demonstrated similarity to the β and δ subdivisions of the Proteobacteria, respectively. Construction of phylogenetic trees consistently grouped these two sequences near the node of their respective branches, suggesting that they possessed only a distant relationship to other members of their group and may represent novel cold-adapted microorganisms. 3.3Dendrogram analysis of DGGE Banding patterns generated by DGGE for each site were used for cluster analysis and the creation of a dendrogram (Fig. 3). Stability of the dendrogram was tested (as described in Section 2), and consistently resulted in the groupings shown in Fig. 3. Sample sites divided into two clusters based on their geographic origin, i.e. Alert and Kuujjuaq. The Kuujjuaq samples were clustered amongst themselves based upon contamination level: K3 and K4 came from nearby tundra areas uncontaminated by petroleum hydrocarbons, whereas K1 and K2 came from contaminated areas adjacent to the refueling station. The Alert samples grouped together in a slightly different fashion. The Ac (uncontaminated) and A1 (heavily contaminated) soils clustered together within the Alert grouping. The A2 and A3 sites (uncontaminated and moderately contaminated, respectively) were grouped at an intermediate position between the other Alert samples and the Kuujjuaq sample cluster K3 and K4. Cluster analysis of DGGE banding patterns based on position of bands using unweighted pair groupings of a similarity coefficient (SAB) matrix. Samples clustered geographically, with contamination levels having no apparent influence. 3.4CLPP analysis The metabolic diversity of the cold-adapted soil microbial communities was estimated by the total number of substrates oxidized in the Biolog GN plates at 10°C. The samples divided into four groups (number of substrates oxidized out of 95 shown in parentheses): A2 (87) and A3 (86); Ac (61), K1 (66), and K3 (70); K4 (46) and K2 (49); and A1 (26). There was no observable pattern in the groupings with respect to geographic origin of the samples, contamination levels, or any of the other measured parameters. The rate of oxidation of each substrate was calculated (data not shown) and similarity between samples was assessed using cluster analysis. Dendrograms created using both squared Euclidean and Manhattan similarity indices generated identical groupings (Fig. 4) which were very similar to those of the DGGE dendrograms, i.e. clustering based upon geographic origin of the samples. Sample divisions within the two clusters could not be described by any of the measured parameters including contamination level and total carbon or nitrogen levels. Figure 4. 