FIG. 4. View larger version: In this page In a new window Download as PowerPoint Slide FIG. 4. Phylogenetic groups during the bioremediation experiment. (A) Treatment 2M (biostimulation without nutrient amendment). (B) Treatment 4M (biostimulation with nutrient amendment). Excised bands from treatment 2M accounted for 73 to 84% of the total lane intensity, whereas for treatment 4M excised bands accounted for 81 to 91% of the total band intensity. On day 0, the bands studied account for 70% of the total signal of the lane. Alpha, α-Proteobacteria; Beta, β-Proteobacteria; Gamma, γ-Proteobacteria; CFB, Cytophaga-Flexibacter-Bacteroides group; High G+C, high-G+C-content gram-positive bacteria. A correlation analysis of the phylogenetic groups and evolution of the TPH concentration showed that the α- and γ-Proteobacteria exhibited the highest positive and inverse correlations with the TPH concentration, respectively (r2 = 0.92 to 0.93) for the 2M treatment; for the 4M treatment the α-Proteobacteria exhibited the highest positive correlation (r2 = 0.78), whereas the β-Proteobacteria exhibited the highest inverse correlation (r2 = 0.85), followed by the γ-Proteobacteria (r2 = 0.78). For target PAH concentrations in the 2M treatment, the CFB group exhibited the highest inverse correlation (r2 = 0.81 to 0.85) with the pyrene, benzo(a)anthracene, and chrysene concentrations, whereas α-Proteobacteria and γ-Proteobacteria exhibited the highest positive and inverse correlations with fluoranthene (r2 = 0.92 to 0.94), phenanthrene (r2 = 0.76), and anthracene (r2 = 0.84). β-Proteobacteria did not exhibit good correlations with target PAHs (r2 = 0 to 0.4). In contrast, for nutrient treatment 4M, α-Proteobacteria and β-Proteobacteria exhibited the highest positive and inverse correlations, respectively, with fluoranthene and pyrene (r2 = 0.83 to 0.89). Also, β-Proteobacteria exhibited a good inverse correlation with phenanthrene, anthracene, benzo(a)anthracene, and chrysene (r2 = 0.84 to 0.92). γ-Proteobacteria exhibited lower correlations with PAH concentrations (r2 = 0.5 to 0.7) for the 4M treatment. Monitoring bioaugmentation by denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis.At the beginning of the experiment, the profiles for biostimulation and bioaugmentation were very similar, forming two clusters (21 and 45 days) in each of the two treatments (Fig. 5). Only one of the DGGE bands from the inoculum was shared in inoculated soil during the 200 days of the experiment. Taking into account the fact that inoculation was performed five times (days 14, 26, 57, 120, and 165) in order to have 108 microorganisms g (dry weight) of soil−1 at each time of addition, this result implies that the inoculum did not compete favorably with the indigenous bacterial community during the first stages of PAH biodegradation. However, at 200 days the DGGE profiles for biostimulation and bioaugmentation were quite different. Hence, it seems that at early stages, when the biodegradation process was dominant, an exogenous inoculum did not affect the distribution of the indigenous microbial population, while at late stages, when the biodegradation of PAHs and TPH was very slow, it could have an effect (Table 2). FIG. 5. View larger version: In this page In a new window Download as PowerPoint Slide FIG. 5. Denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis profile and cluster analysis (Pearson product moment, unweighted pair group method) for the bioaugmentation treatment (treatment 6M), the nutrient addition treatment (treatment 4M), and untreated dry soil (treatment 1M) over the course of 200 days of incubation. The codes on the left indicate the treatment and the number of days of incubation; for example, 6M 21D indicates treatment 6M and incubation for 21 days. The cross-hatched area in the inoculum lane shows major bands that did not comigrate. 