The mechanical arm of the research submersible allowed us to collect solid gas hydrate (Sassen and MacDonald, 1997). An inverted steel cup with sharpened edges was used to chip fragments from larger hydrate masses, which floated up into the cup. The cup and gas hydrate were transferred to a pressure vessel containing ambient sea water. After sealing, the pressure vessel was used to transport the gas hydrate samples to the sea surface at approximate in situ pressure and temperature. Discrete gas hydrate was decomposed within the pressure vessel on the surface, and the resultant gas was transferred to vacutainers and frozen at −20°C. Samples of sediments (generally representing 15–25 cm sections) were collected from crests of gas hydrate mounds (Fig. 2) using Lexan push cores 30 cm in length and 7.5 cm inside diameter. Depth of core penetration was generally controlled by direct contact with the hard upper surface of massive gas hydrate. Sediment samples from the mounds were thus intimately associated with gas hydrate. Other sediment samples were collected near tube worms adjacent to gas hydrate mounds (Fig. 2). Upon recovery, sediment samples were canned with sodium azide bactericide and frozen at −20°C. Analyses of gas samples focused on C1–C5 gas chromatography, measurement of a13C and aD of methane, and measurements of a13C on C2–C5 hydrocarbons and CO2. Some degassing of sediment core samples occurred during the ascent of the research submersible; C1–C5 gas concentrations reported in Table 2 should be regarded as minimums. The a13C values are reported as parts per thousand ( ) relative to the Peedee belemnite (PDB) standard (±0.2 ); the aD values are reported as  relative to the standard mean ocean water (SMOW) standard (±−5 ). C1–C5 hydrocarbon gases were separated using a Hewlett–Packard 5890 gas chromatograph using an activated alumina column (1 m F-1 80/100) temperature programmed from 100° to 160°C at 32°C/min. Known volumes of authentic hydrocarbon standards were used to identify and quantitate peak responses. Concentrations of each hydrocarbon is expressed in ppm by sediment volume, and normalized as percent of total C1–C5 hydrocarbons. Analyses of a13C of C1–C5 hydrocarbon gases and CO2 were performed at the Houston Area Research Council (HARC; The Woodlands, Texas) using a Varian 3400 gas chromatograph with a Finnigan MAT 252 IRMS. Gas chromatographic separation was performed on a Poraplot Q capillary column (25 m), temperature programmed from 50° to 210°C at 50°C/min. Analysis of methane aD was performed by Coastal Science Laboratories (Austin, Texas) using an upgraded Micromass 602 mass spectrometer. Gas chromatographic separation was performed using a Porpak Q column (1.5 m). The bulk of thermogenic hydrocarbon gases and CO2 from the subsurface hydrocarbon system bypass shallow sediments, and exit by venting to the water column. However, a fraction of the vent gas undergoes a rapid phase change (Sassen and MacDonald, 1997) under ambient temperature (∼7°C) and pressure (∼5400 kPa), and crystallizes as solid gas hydrate. It is important to characterize vent gases because they are the primary starting materials from which other hydrocarbon pools are derived. The molecular and isotopic compositions of two vent gas samples from Bush Hill (Fig. 6) are similar to unaltered hydrocarbon gases in subsurface reservoirs of Jolliet Field, as reported by Kennicutt et al. (1988). Methane is the ma jor component of two vent gas samples from Bush Hill (90.4% and 95.9%); individual C2+ hydrocarbons decrease in relative abundance with increasing carbon number, and n-C5 occurs in trace amounts (<0.1%) (Table 1). 