To the best of our knowledge, salt marsh microbial community structure and function have not been characterized by high-density PhyloChip and GeoChip microarray analyses. These high throughput culture-independent analyses have been shown to identify a greater microbial diversity in environmental samples compared to traditional sequencing of clone libraries [28]. Therefore, the goal of this study was to employ microarray-based methods to characterize the changes to the microbial community within a coastal salt marsh during and after oiling from the Deepwater Horizon. Materials and Methods Study Site The salt marsh study site was located on the eastern side of the Point Aux Pins peninsula, southwest of Bayou La Batre, Alabama (30°22′ N; 88°18′ W) (Figure 1a). The marsh is dominated by Juncus roemerianus and bordered by Spartina alterniflora along the outer edge. The rush stands extend approximately 10 m out from the shoreline. Water column depth during summer months was approximately 1 m. Tides are diurnal (daily) and of moderate energy and amplitude (∼0.38 m) [29]. No specific permits or permissions were required for the described field studies at this location, which is not privately-owned or protected, and the field studies did not involve endangered or protected species. Sample Collection and Processing Triplicate sediment cores (30 cm; 7.3 cm I.D.) were collected within the marsh stands (designated “Marsh”) approximately 2–4 m from shore and outside the stands approximately 25 m from the shoreline (designated “Inlet”) (Figure 1b). Sediment cores were collected from the same location within the salt marsh during each sampling period. All samples were stored at 4°C and −80°C prior to processing. Sampling occurred on June 8, July 2, and September 10, 2010. Tar balls and tar mats mixed with wrack (organic debris) were collected in triplicate along the marsh fringe and shoreline on July 2, 2010. Sediment cores were aseptically extruded in 2 cm sections with the 0–2 cm and 8–10 cm sections used for analysis. Inlet water column temperature, salinity, dissolved oxygen, total dissolved solids, and pH were measured with a handheld YSI 556 multiprobe meter (YSI Incorporated, Yellow Springs, Ohio USA). DNA Extraction Genomic DNA was extracted in triplicate from 1 g sediment with an MP Biomedicals FastDNA spin kit for soils (MP Biomedicals, Solon, OH) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. DNA concentrations were measured via absorption at 260 nm using a NanoDrop ND-1000 (Thermo Scientific, Beverly, MA). PCR Amplification of 16S rRNA Genes and Microarray Analysis (PhyloChip and GeoChip) Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) of 16S rRNA genes was performed with universal Bacteria (27F and 1492R) primers. Reagents for all PCR reactions and thermocycling conditions for bacterial 16S rRNA genes were performed as previously described [27], except that bacterial product was amplified in 25 cycles (instead of 30 cycles). Bacterial 16S rRNA gene diversity was assessed for June, July, and September 2010 sediments using the G3 PhyloChip, an Affymetrix platform microarray. The G3 PhyloChip contains over 1 million probes and can identify up to nearly 60,000 operational taxonomic units (OTUs). OTUs were scored as “present” when at least two of the three replicate core samples contained the OTU. Microarray sample preparation, hybridization, and scaling were performed as previously described [27]. Microbial functional gene analysis was conducted using the GeoChip 2.0 for June and July 2010 sediment samples. The GeoChip 2.0 microarray contains probes for >10,000 genes in >150 functional groups [30], [31]. Microarray sample preparation, hybridization, and normalization were performed on triplicate samples as previously described [30], [32]. Data analyses were performed with Primer-E software (version 6.1.13, Plymouth Marine Laboratory). Non-metric multi-dimensional scaling (nMDS) ordination of the bacterial community data was generated from a Bray Curtis resemblance matrix based on the mean relative abundance of taxa identified by PhyloChip in triplicate cores. 