The distribution of ARDRA types present in different clone libraries was determined and used to calculate the Shannon-Weaver index {H = −Σ[ni  ·  log(ni)], where ni is the relative contribution of clone type i to the whole library}. ARDRA types occurring more than once in a library were selected for sequence analysis. Sequence data were obtained with a single primer (pD′, E. coli positions 534 to 518 [12]), generating 0.5 kb of sequence data. For a selection of clones, the nearly complete 16S rDNA was sequenced in both directions. Sequences were compared to sequences deposited in the GenBank DNA database by using the BLAST algorithm (1). Alignments were performed by using ClustalW and corrected manually. Distance analysis using the Jukes and Cantor correction (24) and bootstrap resampling (100 times) was done with the TREECON package (45), and the distance matrix was used to construct a tree via neighbor joining (35). Parsimony analysis was done by using DNAPARS from the PHYLIP package (14). Nutrient levels and degradation of oil in nutrient-amended microcosms.Throughout the incubation, nitrogen concentrations in the effluent (and hence the sediment pore water) were significantly related to the amount of nutrient added (Fig. 2A; average correlation of 0.90 [P < 0.05], with all correlations greater than 0.61), even though most of the nitrogen was removed by the tide directly after nutrient addition. The rate and extent of oil degradation were examined by measuring carbon dioxide production over time and the oil composition at the start and end of the experiment (28 days). In all oiled microcosms treated with inorganic nutrients, the rate of carbon dioxide production strongly increased relative to that of the control treated with oil only (0% N), directly after fertilization (Fig. 2B and C). After 28 days, the amount of carbon dioxide produced in the fertilized microcosms was significantly higher than that in the untreated 0% N microcosms (P < 0.001). Daily carbon dioxide production slowly declined over time, with nutrient amendments temporarily stimulating carbon dioxide production (Fig. 2B and data not shown). In general, the initial rate of carbon dioxide production appeared to increase with the amount of fertilizer added; only the 10% N treatment deviated strongly (Fig. 2C). A significant positive correlation (r = 0.74 to 0.96, P < 0.05) between the amount of nutrient added and daily carbon dioxide production, corrected for the background production in the 0% N microcosm, was observed only between days 2 and 7, when the 10% N microcosm was not considered. During the last 21 days, no correlation (r = −0.182, P > 0.05) was found between nutrient treatment and the total carbon dioxide produced in this period (Fig. 2C). For all other nutrient-amended microcosms, the amount of carbon dioxide produced after 28 days fell within the average ± the standard deviation of the 0.75% N microcosms (Fig. 2C). Figure 2D shows the percentages of biodegradation of TPH, TRH, nC11-to-nC35 alkanes, and PAH. Significantly greater biodegradation of these compound classes was obtained with all of the bioremediation treatments than with the oil-only control (P < 0.001). TRH, nC11-to-nC35 alkanes, and aromatic hydrocarbons were almost completely removed (91% ±2%, 98% ± 1%, and 92% ± 4%, respectively). No significant differences in TRH, n-alkane, and aromatic hydrocarbon biodegradation were observed between the various nutrient amendments (P > 0.05). However, TPH degradation was significantly greater in the 6% N microcosm than in the 0.25% N, 4% N, and 10% N microcosms (P < 0.05). Carbon dioxide production in the oiled, untreated controls (0% N) was similar (P > 0.05) to that in the unoiled microcosms treated with fertilizer (FO; Fig. 