It should be noted that the samples from the 0 and 4% N microcosms taken at day 0 were frozen immediately after oil addition and, although treated with oil, the bacterial populations would not have had time to respond to the oil addition and, in effect, represent bacterial populations not yet affected by oiling. For the five libraries from microcosms not affected by oiling (day 0 libraries of the FO, 0% N, and 4% N microcosms and day 6 and day 26 libraries of the FO microcosm), phylogenetic analysis of the clones occurring more than once in the libraries indicated that they belonged to a wide range of phylogenetic groups, with none dominating the clone libraries (Table 2 and Fig. 7). Almost half of the clones were unique, meaning that their ARDRA type was only encountered once in a clone library. The purpose of this study was not to catalogue the wider diversity of the bacterial populations present in the beach sediments, and these were not analyzed further. The high diversity was also indicated by the fact that, of the 49 clones sequenced, clones with similar ARDRA profiles and >99% sequence identity were encountered only twice in different clone libraries (indicated by the letters A and B in Table 2). In contrast, oiling and bioremediation resulted in strong dominance by a few ARDRA/sequence types (Table 2 and Fig. 7). This decrease in diversity was also illustrated by the calculation of the Shannon-Weaver index for the clone libraries (Fig. 8). Diversity remained high in the microcosm treated with fertilizer only. However, oiling strongly decreased the bacterial community diversity during the first 6 days of the experiment. The strongest effect was observed for the bioremediation treatment. Nevertheless, between days 6 and 26, diversity began to recover to preoiling levels (Fig. 8). The day 6 libraries from microcosms treated with oil only (0% N) and the bioremediated microcosm (4% N) were dominated by γ-proteobacteria (62.2% of the clones in the 0% N microcosm and 73.1% of the clones in the 4% N microcosm; Fig. 7). γ-Proteobacteria (50.6% of the clones) continued to dominate the library from the microcosm treated with oil alone (0% N) after 26 days, but in the bioremediated microcosm (4% N), α-proteobacteria became dominant (63.3%). The nearly complete cloned 16S rDNA of representatives of the dominantly occurring ARDRA types was sequenced. The dominant α-proteobacterial clones (4%N-26d-5, -7, and -27) belonged to the aerobic anoxygenic phototrophic bacteria and were phylogenetically most closely related to Erythrobacter longus and E. citreus (Table 2 and Fig. 9A). ARDRA profiles indicative of these sequences were only found in the sample taken 26 days after 4% N fertilizer treatment and represented 50.0% of the clones. A different ARDRA type (0% N-26d-88) most closely related to Erythrobacter spp. was found in the day 26 library of the 0% N library, constituting 4.2% of the library (Table 2). Two dominant ARDRA types, found in several clone libraries (indicated by C and D in Table 2 and Fig. 9B) represented the alkane-degrading Alcanivorax/Fundibacter group (5, 48) of the γ-proteobacteria. Sequences of ARDRA type C were distinct from Alcanivorax borkumensis and Fundibacter jadensis but formed a distinct group with these sequences (Fig. 9B). Type D sequences were almost identical to A. borkumensis (>99.8%). 