Consequently, we believe that the determination of abundances of sequence types in a clonal diversity survey is a useful first step in predicting abundances of microorganisms in the environment. In a methanogenic ecosystem, polymers such as polysaccharides, proteins, lipids, and nucleic acids typically are broken down by the action of extracellular hydrolytic enzymes into oligomers and monomers such as amino acids, sugars, purines, pyrimidines, glycerol, and fatty acids (34, 48). Fatty acids, in turn, are fermented to simpler acids (including acetate), hydrogen, and carbon dioxide by syntrophic bacteria that rely on the removal of acetate and hydrogen by other microorganisms to render the energetics of this fermentation favorable. The fate of acetate, hydrogen, and carbon dioxide depends on the organisms involved: hydrogen-oxidizing methanogens can produce methane from hydrogen and carbon dioxide, homoacetogens can produce acetate from hydrogen and carbon dioxide, and aceticlastic methanogens can produce methane and carbon dioxide from acetate. Environmental conditions dictate the most favorable processes. Recent studies on lake sediments and other cold, freshwater environments have shown that, at temperatures lower than 20°C, methane production occurs predominantly by aceticlastic methanogenesis and that hydrogen is consumed preferentially by homoacetogens (9, 28, 36,37). This temperature effect also has been rationalized thermodynamically by Schink (34). The low temperature (10 to 12°C) of the Wurtsmith aquifer and the dominance in the methanogenic zone of probable aceticlastic methanogens indicate that aceticlastic methanogenesis is primarily important in hydrocarbon degradation in this environment as well. The low abundance of sequences that correspond to organisms known for H2-CO2methanogenesis is consistent with this notion and suggests that hydrogen utilization may be dominated by acetogenic bacteria that are not yet identifiable by rDNA sequences. Overall, then, we propose that the degradation of petroleum hydrocarbons in the methanogenic zone of the Wurtsmith aquifer proceeds by initial hydrolytic attack on hydrocarbons; fermentation of the resulting organic acids by syntrophic bacteria, including fermentation of the simple acids by microorganisms represented by theSyntrophus-related sequence type WCHB1-12; and aceticlastic methanogenesis by microorganisms represented by theMethanosaeta-related sequence type WCHD3-03. These two types of organisms may be involved in a syntrophic relationship in the Wurtsmith aquifer and may be useful indicator organisms for the evaluation of methanogenic intrinsic bioremediation in this and other aquifers. It remains to be seen, however, if these or similar types of microorganisms are present in other contaminated aquifers undergoing methanogenic intrinsic bioremediation. 