3B). More recently, from an alkane-degrading, nitrate-reducing consortium, Callaghan et al. (2009) indicated that a carboxylation-like mechanism analogous to the activation strategy previously proposed by So et al. (2003) was the likely route for the anaerobic biodegradation of hexadecane. However, in both cases, the hypothetical fatty acid intermediate (2-ethylalkanoate) which should result from the incorporation of inorganic carbon at C-3 of the alkane has never been detected. There is an on-going debate about this initial activation mechanism. From an energetic point of view, the carboxylation of alkanes is not feasible under standard conditions (ΔG°′ = +28 kJ/mol) unless the concentration of the fatty acid (2-ethylalkanoate) is in the micromolar order of magnitude or less otherwise this reaction will not proceed under physiological conditions (Thauer and Shima 2008). The possibility of other reaction(s) preceding the carboxylation has also been proposed (So et al. 2003). 7.3. Alternative activation mechanisms Depending on the microorganisms and electron acceptors available in a selective environment, anaerobic degradation of alkanes may proceed via alternative activation mechanisms not involving addition of fumarate or carboxylation. For instance, Pseudomonas chloritidismutans AW-1T is able to produce its own oxygen via chlorate respiration for subsequent metabolism of alkanes (Fig. 3C-1) (Mehboob et al. 2009). This would indicate the requirement for oxygenases to incorporate molecular oxygen thus generated from the dismutation of chlorite into the alkane. Such a reaction is referred to as “unusual oxygenation” of alkane since it takes place in the total exclusion of air. A similar activation strategy via “intra-cellular oxygen production” is also possible with electron acceptors such nitrate or nitrite (Ettwig et al. 2010). However, in a recent work, it was presumed that nitrite or nitric oxide generated during the reduction of nitrate may be directly involved as a co-reactant for the activation of alkanes in strain HdN1 (Fig. 3C-2) (Zedelius et al. 2010). Given that the activation metabolite of NO2− or NO co-reacting with alkanes is still unknown; this hypothesis remains to be demonstrated. Another recently proposed strategy may involve anaerobic hydroxylation of oil alkanes (Fig. 3C-3). Pyrosequencing of total genomic DNA retrieved from methanogenic enrichment cultures degrading crude oil revealed the presence of genes encoding the β-oxidation pathway and also alcohol and aldehyde dehydrogenase genes. The absence of assA-like genes and metabolites that would have indicate an addition to the double bond of fumarate or even likely a carboxylation suggest that oil alkanes in the methanogenic enrichment culture are probably activated via anaerobic hydroxylation ( Head et al. 2010). 8. Conclusions and future perspectives Alkanes are quantitatively the most important fraction in crude oil. 