The anaerobic biodegradation of alkanes, which has now been documented to occur in anoxic habitats, is of great importance for the oil industry. Today, this process remains an exciting area of investigation to understand the factors that govern the biodegradation of oil in deep-subsurface reservoirs, and for the bioremediation of oil-contaminated environments. It is now well-established that microbial activities associated with petroleum reservoirs have led to the decrease of oil quality, making refining more costly and recovery more difficult (Head et al. 2003). Examination of deep-subsurface petroleum reservoirs has revealed the presence of live microbial communities dominated by anaerobes, therefore oil reservoirs have been referred to as “geobioreactors” in which different physiological types of anaerobic microorganisms including fermentative, syntrophic, sulfidogenic and methanogens may be responsible for the biodegradation of crude oil in situ with the preferential removal of the saturated hydrocarbon fraction ( Magot et al., 2000; Jones et al., 2008 ; Wang et al., 2010). Petroleum reserves have been depleted to certain levels, and anaerobic degradation is considered to be one of the major processes responsible for this phenomenon. Moreover, biogenic methane that is commonly associated with biodegraded oil reservoirs is believe to be a result of the microbial decomposition of oil alkanes (Jones et al. 2008). While methanogenic degradation of oil alkanes has significant effect on the recovery of high-value light crude oil, on the positive side, in situ methanogenic biodegradation activities may offer a route for potential alternative and innovative energy recovery strategies from existing oil reservoirs after extraction. After extensive water flooding, at least two-third of the crude oil still remains entrapped in pores within the formation, the recovery of energy from conventional reserves via in situ conversion of even a smaller fraction of the residual oil to methane gas could represent a considerable supply of energy. This is great interest because world requirements for methane are estimated to increase within the next three decades (International Energy Outlook 2009, 2010; www.eia.doe.gov/oiaf/ieo/) and methanogenic conversion of oil alkanes is seen as a future solution for world energy needs (Fig. 4). However, there are still many questions regarding the anaerobic biodegradation of alkanes that need to be addressed. For instance, though the isolation of anaerobic microorganisms capable of utilizing alkanes has been essential for a comprehensive understanding of their role and behavior in anoxic habitats, the complex interactions within methanogenic alkane-degrading communities are still not well understood. Further research is needed to explore multidisciplinary, e.g., molecular, microbiological and chemical or geochemical, approaches to establish the key organisms, biochemical reactions and mechanisms involved in such complex associations. For instance, there is now reasonable circumstantial evidence that some fermentative bacteria such as Firmicutes might be directly implicated in the degradation of hydrocarbons. It is also worth noting that microorganisms affiliated to Firmicutes are the most commonly encountered bacterial taxon in samples retrieved from oil reservoirs ( Gray et al. 2010), hence diverse and abundant members of the Firmicutes should not only be considered as “traditional” fermentative bacteria, they could have adapted to metabolize oil components in situ and in methanogenic oil degrading enrichment cultures. Sulfidogenic prokaryotes, however, are metabolically versatile and are able to grow either by using sulfate as electron acceptor or by syntrophic lifestyle in the absence of electron acceptor. This characteristic makes them important members of degradative microbial communities. Davidova et al. (2006) reported that Desulfoglaeba alkanexedens ALDCT is able to syntrophically degrade alkanes in co-culture with hydrogenotrophic methanogens. Interestingly, several sulfudogenic with the capacity for alkane oxidation are able to utilize thiosulfate, sulfite or elemental sulfur as electron acceptors to enhance their growth yield and rates. This is of great importance because organic sulfur compounds present in crude oils can serve as sulfur-based electron acceptors (Röling et al. 2003). The capability of T. sibiricus and related organisms to use organic substrates such alkanes without needs for exogenous electron acceptors makes them potential key players of the complex metabolic food web existing in habitats such as high temperature petroleum reservoirs ( Mardanov et al. 2009). The role of hyperthermophilic organisms such as Thermococcus sp. and Archaeglobus sp. 