However, this negative effect of ethanol on BTEX biodegradation seems to be easily by-passed by the addition of new or other electron acceptors, like oxygen, by aeration (bioventing or air-sparging), iron or sulphates (da Silva and Alvarez, 2005; Österreicher-Cunha et al., 2004, 2007). Thus, the benefits of ethanol-amended gasoline regarding the control and reduction of atmospheric pollution are not threatened by problems linked to its biodegradation in soil; simple and accessible measures can be taken to avoid a longer persistence of gasoline–ethanol mixtures in the subsurface. Moreover, the increase of biomass caused by ethanol degradation in the saturated zone seems to lead to a more efficient subsequent degradation of BTEX (da Silva and Alvarez, 2002). However, a better understanding of these processes is still necessary and crucial to the decision-making involved in the remediation approaches to be adopted in cases of soil contamination with ethanol-amended gasoline. 5. Conclusions This study assessed some of the processes that regulate the biodegradation and distribution of gasoline and ethanol-blended gasoline in unsaturated soil, analysing physical, chemical and microbiological parameters. The analysis of results seems to indicate that the effect of ethanol on the fate of gasoline compounds may actually be of concern: all the parameters monitored suggest a higher retention and a delayed degradation of BTEX in unsaturated porous medium when gasoline is amended with ethanol. When gasoline was introduced with ethanol, more BTEX were retained in unsaturated inert soil; natural attenuation of gasoline compounds in undisturbed soil took longer, as shown by chemical analysis of residues; microbial degrading activities were much higher and longer lasting in ethanol-containing soils; unspecialised culturable bacteria, unable to grow under high amounts of contaminants, resumed growth much later than in gasoline-contamination situations. The co-solvency effect of ethanol on BTEX and its high solubility in water seem to cause a higher retention of BTEX in the soil matrix. The presence of gasoline and gasoline–ethanol mixtures in soil enhanced microbial enzymatic activity but suppressed culturable bacterial populations. The results presented here show the possibility of evaluating the impact caused by contamination as well as the reduction of soil toxicity by evaluating culturable bacterial populations. Bacterial counts showed a delay in soil populations’ reaction to contamination in gasoline–ethanol -contaminated soil when compared to gasoline-contaminated ones, which indicates a possible preferential degradation of ethanol. Microbial degrading activity, higher in soils contaminated with BTEX–ethanol, suggests it is a better tool to evaluate biodegradation activities than assessing microbial contingents, which only evaluates shifts in numbers of culturable populations. However, counts of culturable populations may be useful to rapidly assess soil toxicity due to contamination. Contamination persists longer in unsaturated soil when in the presence of ethanol. Still, additional and more accurate chemical analyses are necessary to better evaluate contaminant residue in soil and measure its persistence up to its effect on microbial populations, especially culturable bacteria. However, the possibility that ethanol may delay BTEX degradation should not invalidate its use as a fuel and/or gasoline oxygenated additive; its positive effects on atmospheric pollution are undeniable as well as its value as an alternative to fossil fuels. Studies to further verify degradation processes are necessary so as to determine adequate approaches to address spills of gasoline–ethanol mixtures that could bypass eventual negative effects of ethanol. \ 