In contaminated soils, the presence of contaminants increased microbial activity, probably because of biodegrading activities; the stimulation was higher and longer lasting when gasoline was introduced blended with ethanol (Fig. 4). BTEX-contaminated soils present a 50% increase in activity on the second day after contamination; levels then drop below the initial values, suggesting that the population must re-adapt to the new conditions. Ethanol-containing soils also have an increased activity on the second day (>2.5 times the initial level). This activity lasts until the 10th day, gradually dropping. An initial immediate degradation of ethanol was possibly followed by the degradation of BTEX, indicated by lower levels of activity, similar, on the fifth day after contamination, to those observed in gasoline-contaminated soils on the second day. Enzymatic activity during the assay (final/initial values, μg fluorescein min−1… Download full-size image Fig. 4. Enzymatic activity during the assay (final/initial values, μg fluorescein min−1 g−1 soil). As shown by residue analysis, gasoline compounds were detected for a longer time in soils contaminated with ethanol mixtures (Fig. 5). It was not possible in these studies to link soil recovery, as shown by resumption of growth of culturable bacteria and the return of activity to initial levels, to threshold levels of contamination. However, measurements of degrading activities of the microbiota decreased rapidly once contamination residues were no longer detected (Figs. 4 and 5b). In sterile soils where microbial communities were eliminated by autoclaving, chemical analysis showed that BTEX residues persisted in both gasoline- and gasoline–ethanol -contaminated soils whereas they were no longer detected in non-sterile soils (Fig. 5b). (a) Contaminant residues in soil blocks during a 141-day assay (CG-FID… Download full-size image Fig. 5. (a) Contaminant residues in soil blocks during a 141-day assay (CG-FID determination). (b) Contaminant residues in soil columns during a 33-day assay, showing remaining residues in sterile soils (CG-FID determination, g g−1 soil). 3.2. Volatilisation assays Gravimetric monitoring of water and gasoline volatilisation from uncontaminated and contaminated soils showed that most water and contaminant volatilisation happened rapidly during the first hours after the introduction of contaminants into soil. No significant difference was observed in gasoline- and gasoline–ethanol -contaminated soils (Fig. 6). Contaminated sterile and dry soils showed between 5 and 10% weight loss in the first day of the assay, the weight remaining constant afterwards until the 20th day. These experiments showed that, despite ethanol's higher volatility, volatilisation of contaminants did not seem faster when gasoline was blended with ethanol. Soil weight loss in natural soils with standard and ethanol-blended gasoline… Download full-size image Fig. 6. Soil weight loss in natural soils with standard and ethanol-blended gasoline (ratio final/ initial weight; average ± 1 standard deviation): top, 30-day monitoring; bottom, detail of the first 3 h after contamination. 