In both studies the samples were subsurface sediments collected at a depth of two meters or greater, whereas the samples collected in this study were surficial samples collected at the interface between the water and the sediment. Distributions of organisms at the domain level were slightly different between the Peru Margin/BT Basin samples and our GoM samples, with the former harboring a greater percentage of archaea (18.1–8.6% compared to 2.9–3.3%) and eukaryotes (17.7–5.8% compared to 2.6–3.3%). At the phylum level, the Peru Margin and BT Basin data revealed a different picture from this study with a more even distribution of Proteobacteria and Firmicutes, followed by Euryarchaeota and Chloroflexi (Figure ​Figure9A9A). Although the functional gene patterns were similar among the three studies, sequences associated with the “metabolism of aromatic compounds” category were more abundant in all three of our samples (1.4–1.9%) following the DWH oil spill compared to the BT Basin (0.5%) level evaluated prior to the spill (Figure ​Figure9B9B). Hierarchical clustering analysis, based on subsystem functional classification, revealed geographical separation between the Peru Margin and Gulf of Mexico samples (Figure 10A). Within the Gulf of Mexico cluster, the BT Basin clustered separately from GoM023, GoM278, and GoM315. Furthermore, GoM315 and GoM278, the samples located relatively close to the DWH rig, clustered separately from GoM023, the sample furthest from the DWH rig. A similar pattern of separation was visualized using principal component analysis (Figure 10B) with the organism classifications. DISCUSSION In this study, we present three new metagenomic data sets from deep-sea sediments of the Gulf of Mexico following the DWH oil spill. Due to logistical and political circumstances surrounding the DWH oil spill, three samples were the extent of which we were able to obtain. These data, however, present a unique opportunity to examine deep-sea sediments following a massive anthropogenic hydrocarbon loading event and triples the number of metagenomic datasets previously available (one metagenome; Biddle et al., 2011) for deep-sea subsurface sediments in the Gulf of Mexico. Although the lack of replication makes it difficult to draw wide conclusions regarding the effects of hydrocarbon exposure on microbial community composition and activity, these metagenomes provide important data to make baseline observations that will need to be examined more thoroughly in future studies. Two previous deep-sea metagenomic studies resulted in the suggestion that there is a core metagenomic structure for deep-sea sediments, composed of four main microbial groups (Euryarchaeota, Proteobacteria, Firmicutes, and Chloroflexi) that can vary depending on specific parameters, such as depth, organic carbon content, and geography (Biddle et al., 2008; Biddle et al., 2011). These four microbial taxa were also detected in GoM sediment samples in the present work; however, they do not constitute the four major groups detected in this report (Proteobacteria, Bacteroidetes, Firmicutes, and Actinobacteria). Despite similarities to the microbial communities described previously (Biddle et al., 2008; Biddle et al., 2011), our cross-study comparisons via hierarchical clustering and principal component analyses reveal a distinct separation between the Peru Margin communities (Biddle et al., 2008) and both Gulf of Mexico communities (Biddle et al., 2011, and current report). This is of particular interest, since the two previous studies were subsurface samples, compared to our surficial samples. A metagenomic fosmid library of deep-sea sediments from the organic-rich Qiongdongnan Basin in the South China Sea (Hu et al., 2010) revealed a community structure that was more similar to this study than to those of the Biddle et al. (2008), 2011 studies. These data suggest the possibility that organic carbon content is more relevant to microbial community structure than geography. Hu et al. (2010) detected Proteobacteria as the dominant (~43%) bacterial phylum, and Deltaproteobacteria as the most abundant class within this phylum. KEGG analysis of the fosmid ends also revealed genes associated with the biodegradation pathways of numerous xenobiotics including, but not limited to dichloroethane, benzoate, biphenyl, ethylbenzene, fluorene, naphthalene, anthracene, styrene, tetrachloroethene, and gamma-hexachlorocyclohexane. The detection of genes related to the biodegradation of xenobiotic compounds in their study and ours supports the premise that deep-sea sediment microbial communities have the potential to metabolize a diverse array of organic compounds, including many that are found in oil. Numerous bacterial species have evolved the ability to metabolize aliphatic (e.g., alkanes and alkenes) and aromatic hydrocarbons (e.g., mono- and polynuclear), with the most rapid and complete degradation achieved through aerobic processes (Fritsche and Hofrichter, 2008). The majority of characterized oil-degraders within marine systems are aerobic members of the Alpha- and Gammaproteobacteria (for reviews see Head et al., 2006; Kim and Kwon, 2010) that use mono- and dioxygenases to initiate degradation (Haddock, 2010; Rojo, 2010). This includes Alcanivorax borkumensis, a ubiquitous gammaproteobacterium in marine environments, which is known to utilize aliphatic hydrocarbons (Yakimov et al., 1998; Schneiker et al., 2006; dos Santos et al., 2010). Following the DWH blow out, Oceanospirillales was shown to be the dominant bacterial orders associated with the resulting deepwater (~1100 m) oil plume (i.e., more than 90% of the sequences were classified as Oceanospirillales, predominantly from one monophylectic lineage(Hazen et al., 2010). Our metagenomic analysis revealed the presence, in all three deep-sea sediment libraries, of bacteria belonging to the broader Oceanospirillales order, including 51–61 sequences specifically recruited to the Alcanivorax borkumensis genome in each sample (Figure ​Figure44). The abundance of Oceanospirillales, however, was relatively low (< 2% of bacterial sequences) compared to those found in the deep water oil plume (Hazen et al., 2010; Mason et al., 2012). 