Data are the means of triplicate analyses. Bars designate one standard deviation. The concentration of MTBE in MTBE-amended Potomac River sediments appeared to decline slowly over a 300 day incubation period when no amendments were made or when HS and Fe(III) or AQDS and Fe(III) were added (data not shown). After this preincubation in the presence of MTBE, the potential for the sediments to metabolize [14C]-MTBE was evaluated in order to provide greater sensitivity in the ability to detect MTBE degradation. The concentration of MTBE in the sediments at the time of [14C]-MTBE addition was ca. 6 mg/L. After a short lag period, one of the triplicate unamended sediment samples converted ca. 30% of the added [14C]-MTBE to 14CO2 within 130 days, whereas the other two unamended sediment samples converted ap proximately 19−23% of the added [14C]-MTBE to 14CO2 in the same period of time (Figure 5). Small amounts of 14CH4 were also produced in all of these sediments. In two of the triplicate sediments treated either with HS or AQDS and Fe(III), [14C]-MTBE was immediately oxidized to 14CO2 (Figure 5). No 14CH4 was produced in these sediments. All Fe(III) oxide-only amended bottles converted ca. 23% of the [14C]-MTBE to 14CO2 at comparable rates (Figure 6). None of the other amendments which included Fe(III) = NTA and Fe(III) = EDTA converted more than 3% of the added [14C]-MTBE to 14CO2 (data not shown). Figure 5 Anaerobic production of 14CO2 and 14CH4 from [14C]-MTBE in sediment from the Potomac River. Sediments were unamended (A), amended with poorly crystalline Fe(III) oxide and humic substances (B), or amended with poorly crystalline Fe(III) oxide and anthraquinone-2,6-disulfonate (C). Open symbols represent 14CO2. Closed symbols represent 14CH4. The data from each of the triplicate incubations for each treatment are shown. Figure 6 Anaerobic production of 14CO2 from [14C]-MTBE in sediment from the Potomac River. Sediments were amended with poorly crystalline Fe(III) oxide. The data from each of the triplicate incubations are shown. Discussion The results demonstrate that MTBE and TBA can be degraded in anaerobic sediments. After an adaptation period, MTBE was actively consumed in aquifer sediments in which the activity of Fe(III)-reducing microorganisms was stimulated with the addition of HS. The aquatic sediments had an intrinsic capacity to degrade MTBE without the need for amendments. The initial concentration of MTBE that was used in this study (50 mg/L) is comparable to concentrations likely to be found in the anaerobic source zones of petroleum-contaminated aquifers (11). These results suggest that it may be possible to develop anaerobic strategies for MTBE bioremediation within the source zone of petroleum-contaminated aquifers. Anaerobic Degradation of MTBE. Previous reports of MTBE degradation in aquifer sediment (11, 30) or soils (32), or aquatic sediments (5, 31) have suggested that MTBE is not readily degraded under in situ, anaerobic conditions. 