Recently, a deltaproteobacterium distantly related to the Syntrophaceae was identified by stable isotope probing of DNA (DNA-SIP) and real-time PCR as a key player of anaerobic benzene degradation in a methanogenic enrichment culture set up from non-contaminated soil (Sakai et al., 2009). The archaeal clone library constructed from this enrichment culture was dominated by phylotypes belonging to the Methanosarcinales and Methanomicrobiales. The authors concluded that benzene was sequentially degraded by a consortium of fermenters, aceticlastic methanogens and hydrogenotrophic methanogens. Such syntrophic relationships likely exist in all benzene-degrading cultures under methanogenic conditions, as methanogens have a narrow organic substrate spectrum restricted to simple low-molecular-weight organic compounds, and are not known for degrading aromatic compounds. Thus, methanogens are assumed to consume hydrogen, acetate or other small molecules released by fermenting organisms. Such syntrophic relationships were also described for the degradation of long-chain alkanes under methanogenic conditions (Zengler et al., 1999). Benzene degradation under sulfate-reducing conditions Sulfate-dependent benzene mineralization was demonstrated for the first time in sediment microcosms from freshwater and marine origin (Lovley et al., 1995; Phelps et al., 1996). These studies verified a previous observation of benzene mineralization where the electron acceptor was assumed to be sulfate (Edwards et al., 1992); actually, this study was the first stating ‘complete’ anaerobic mineralization of benzene. In situ anaerobic benzene degradation at the Ponca City site (USA) could be stimulated by adding sulfate (Anderson and Lovley, 2000), indicating its preferred use as electron acceptor for anaerobic benzene degradation at this site. Sediment laboratory microcosms from this site degraded benzene also with carbon dioxide or ferric iron as electron acceptor (Weiner and Lovley, 1998a; Caldwell et al., 1999). In the last 15 years, several cultures degrading benzene under sulfate-reducing conditions were enriched and the dominant organisms were described. The marine culture enriched by Phelps and colleagues (1996) contained 12 different phylotypes after incubation for 3 years with benzene as sole source of carbon and energy (Phelps et al., 1998). Four clones belonged to the Desulfobacteraceae, the other phylotypes were affiliated to Thiomicrospira (Gammaproteobacteria), Sulfurovum (Epsilonproteobacteria), Bellilinea (Chloroflexi), Exiguobacterium (Bacilli) as well as several members of the Clostridia and Bacteroidetes (according to the RDP Classifier; Wang et al., 2007). After more than 10 years of incubation, a phylotype belonging to the Desulfobacteraceae (‘clone SB-21’) was identified by DNA-SIP for assimilating benzene in this culture (Oka et al., 2008). Notably, a phylotype closely related to clone SB-21 was found to be the dominant organism in a benzene-mineralizing sulfate-reducing culture enriched also from marine sediment (Musat and Widdel, 2008). Furthermore, phylotypes related to the Desulfobacteraceae were detected in higher abundances in two benzene-degrading freshwater enrichments able to use sulfate or carbon dioxide as electron acceptor (Ulrich and Edwards, 2003; Mancini et al., 2008). These observations suggest that members of the Desulfobacteraceae are key players of benzene degradation under sulfate-reducing conditions. However, despite enrichment with benzene for several years, all of these cultures contained still other phylotypes, and a single benzene-degrading Desulfobacteraceae-like organism could not be isolated from any of the described cultures. Therefore, it is possible that benzene is mineralized in these cultures by synergetic or syntrophic relationships of Desulfobacteraceae and other organisms; this can be at least assumed for the enrichment cultures which can use both sulfate and carbon dioxide as electron acceptors. In addition to phylotypes belonging to the Gram-negative Desulfobacteraceae, Gram-positive members of the family Peptococcaceae seem to be key players of sulfate-dependent anaerobic benzene degradation. The enrichment culture of Laban and colleagues (2009) was dominated by a phylotype related to the genus Pelotomaculum; the authors assumed that this organism may assimilate benzene solely using sulfate as electron acceptor. In our own culture enriched from groundwater-percolated sand columns at the field site Zeitz (Vogt et al., 2007), a phylotype affiliated to the Cryptanaerobacter/Pelotomaculum group within the Desulfotomaculum subcluster Ih of the Peptococcaceae (Imachi et al., 2006) was shown to be crucial for sulfate-dependent benzene mineralization, as T-RFLP peak abundances of this organism increased after prolonged incubation with benzene and decreased during growth on other substrates (Kleinsteuber et al., 2008). Moreover, this phylotype and also an Epsilonproteobacterium distantly related to the genus Sulfurovum assimilated carbon from 13C-labelled benzene in a subsequent DNA-SIP experiment (Herrmann et al., 2010). In this experiment, small amounts of 13C-labelled benzene were converted to 13C-labelled methane, and members of the aceticlastic Methanosaetaceae were detected in an archaeal 16S rRNA gene clone library. In addition, several sulfate-reducing Deltaproteobacteria were detected but not found to be 13C-labelled in spite of prolonged incubation with benzene (Kleinsteuber et al., 2008; Herrmann et al., 2010). It was further shown that benzene mineralization could be reversibly inhibited by addition of hydrogen or low amounts of acetate (0.3 mM), indicating that both compounds are intermediates during anaerobic benzene fermentation (Rakoczy et al., unpubl. data). It was therefore suggested that benzene is mineralized by a consortium consisting of syntrophic fermenters, hydrogenotrophic sulfate reducers, aceticlastic methanogens and other acetate-consuming bacteria (Fig. 1). 