The in situ metabolism of oil-degrading bacteria is likely to be limited by a number of environmental parameters, including temperature, the availability of oxygen and major nutrients, oil hydrocarbon content, and weathering or dispersal of the oil (59). Temperatures in this subtropical environment remain optimal for microbial growth throughout the summer, and oxygen profiling indicates that the Pensacola Beach sands remained aerobic throughout the study period with oxygen concentrations at all sampled depth >90% of sediment surface oxygen concentration. The rapid in situ growth we observed after 4 weeks indicates that microbial cells had access to the oil. The majority of our beach sand samples were collected in the supratidal zone and the interstitial pore space of these sands was not saturated with seawater. Therefore, we conclude that the growth of oil-degrading communities was likely limited by desiccation and/or nutrient depletion in the Pensacola Beach sands we studied. Desiccation would exacerbate carbon and nutrient depletion by shutting off the supply of dissolved substrates from inundating tidal waters. In corroboration of previous work on marine sands in the Gulf of Mexico (30, 53), we observed that Pensacola Beach sands contain highly diverse bacterial communities that are predominated by members of the Gammaproteobacteria and Alphaproteobacteria (Fig. 5 and Table 5). Bacterial diversity was higher in beach sands in comparison to the bacterioplankton communities that we sampled (see the supplemental material). Shannon indices place the bacterial communities of beach sands (see Table S1 in the supplemental material) as more diverse than bacterioplankton but not as diverse as the bacterial communities of marine muds or soils (54). Concomitant with changes to bacterial abundance, a pronounced shift in bacterial community structure was observed in Pensacola Beach sands in response to DH oil contamination (Fig. 4). These results emphasize that the embedded oil exerted a strong selective pressure on the sand bacterial community, in concurrence with past research (see reviews by Berthi-Corti and Nachtkamp [5] and Greer [23]). The consensus of studies conducted in oil-contaminated marine environments points to a succession of bacterial populations associated with the early stages of contamination reflecting the initial utilization of various highly degradable hydrocarbon compound classes (aliphatics, aromatics, and polyaromatics [27]). In our study, shifts in community composition in beach sands in response to oil presence were manifested at the strain to family level (Table 5), but little to no change was observed at the class level (Fig. 5). The present study, along with past studies, shows that the Gammaproteobacteria, and to a lesser extent the Alphaproteobacteria, predominate the bacterial communities of marine sediment ecosystems following exposure to oil hydrocarbons (see reviews by Head et al. [27], Yakimov et al. [76], Berthe-Corti and Nachtkamp [5], and Greer [23]). Among the Gammaproteobacteria in the oiled Pensacola Beach sands, members of the Alcanivorax genus were by far the most abundant. The Alcanivorax genus has been associated with the early stages of hydrocarbon degradation (weeks to months after the spill) and has been shown to utilize saturated hydrocarbons such as straight-chain and branched alkanes (50, 76). Other hydrocarbon-degrading members of the Gammaproteobacteria that were detected in the present study (including Acinetobacter, Marinobacter, and Pseudomonas), although they also tend to be less abundant at the onset of hydrocarbon degradation, are more metabolically versatile than Alcanivorax and have been shown to degrade polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) as well as alkanes. Evidence from the present study also points to other microbial groups as key players in oil degradation. RNA-based pyrosequence libraries supported the DNA-based results as members of the Rhodobacteraceae family of the Alphaproteobacteria were among the most abundant phylotypes detected in the presence of oil. A shift toward the Rhodobacteraceae and Gram-positive groups may indicate that a succession has begun in Pensacola Beach oiled sands toward microbial groups involved in the degradation of more recalcitrant oil hydrocarbons. In field studies of weathered marine sediments which were depleted in alkanes, members of the Alphaproteobacteria and Gram positives were the prevailing groups detected (2, 36), and members of these groups represented in our culture collection (Labrenzia, Bacillus, and Microbacterium) were shown to degrade PAHs in pure culture (40, 67). OTU that showed a high sequence identity to Sulfitobacter were the most abundant members of the Rhodobacteraceae that we could assign at the genus level in our pyrosequence libraries. Sulfitobacter is a sulfite-oxidizing bacterium that has been isolated from a variety of marine environments. Thus, the capabilities of the Alphaproteobacteria genera Labrenzia and Sulfitobacter to degrade specific oil compounds should be further explored. 