Other 16S rDNA sequences detected in DGGE profiles from site IR-3, but not at the uncontaminated site, included bands Geo-125 and Geo-144 within the Geobacteraceae family (Fig. 5); Gthrx84, most closely related to Geothrix fermentans; several beta proteobacteria (Beta-137, Beta-169, and Beta-183, most closely related to Azoarcus evansii, and Beta-142, most closely related to an unidentified toluene degrader, isolate D8 [33]); and several sequences (sequences 81, 85, 124, and 184) which appear to represent novel lineages (Fig. 6). Comparison of DGGE patterns from all five sites along the petroleum contaminant gradient at Bemidji indicated major differences in microbial community structure between the uncontaminated site, the Fe(III)-reducing sites (sites IR-3, IR-2, and IR-1, in order of increasing contamination), and the methanogenic (most heavily contaminated) site (Fig. 3). While the overall DGGE patterns did not differ drastically within the Fe(III)-reducing zone, several differences between site IR-3 and sites IR-1 and IR-2 were apparent. These included a much higher intensity of the bands representing Geo-83 and Geo-125 at site IR-3, as well as the presence of several faint bands at sites IR-1 and IR-2 that were not recovered from site IR-3. Bands representing Beta-145 and Gthrx-84 were clearly evident at all of the Fe(III)-reducing sites. Phylogenetic diversity of Geobacteraceae in sediment community. Because of the apparent enrichment of Geobacteraceae in the Fe(III)-reducing sediments that were most active in benzene degradation, the diversity of the Geobacteraceae was examined in more detail with the primer sets designed to specifically target Geobacteraceae. The DGGE patterns from the uncontaminated and benzene-oxidizing sediments revealed marked differences in their Geobacteraceae populations, with no shared sequences apparent. Two 16S rDNA fragments (Geo-83 and Geo-60) were consistently found in PCR products from the benzene-oxidizing sediments from site IR-3 (Fig. 7). Geo-83 was identical in sequence to one of the predominant sequences retrieved from site IR-3 with the less-specific bacterial primers. Like Geo-83, Geo-60 was most closely related to G. chapellei and Pelobacter propionicus. Geo-83 and Geo-60 were the dominant PCR products under several different analysis conditions, including extraction of DNA by a freeze-thaw method (see Materials and Methods), amplification by a seminested PCR protocol (with primers 8F [44] and Geo825R followed by primers 338F-GC and Geo-825R), and 105 dilution of template DNA prior to amplification (data not shown). In addition to these two predominant bands, 16S rDNA amplified from site IR-3 contained several bands of much lower intensity (Geo-58, Geo-48, and Geo-47), which were not members of the Geobacter cluster. Phylogenetic analysis of these sequences suggested that they were deeply branching members of the delta subclass of the proteobacteria and indicated that they probably represent undescribed genera (Fig. 5). However, especially because the current analysis is limited to about 300 base positions, it is difficult to infer phylogenetic relationships of sequences with no known close relatives. In contrast to the results from site IR-3, the DGGE patterns from the uncontaminated zone varied considerably among triplicates or when sediment DNA was diluted prior to amplification (Fig. 7). 16S rDNA sequences retrieved from the uncontaminated site with Geobacteraceae-targeted primers (Geo-2, Geo-3, and Geo-43) fell within a tight phylogenetic cluster that appeared to fall outside of the Geobacteraceae family (Fig. 5). These sequences were distinct from those retrieved from site IR-3 and may represent deeply branching delta proteobacteria (Fig. 5). Benzene-oxidizing enrichment culture. A sediment-free enrichment culture which reduced Fe(III) in a medium with benzene as the sole electron donor and poorly crystalline Fe(III) oxide as the sole electron acceptor was established with sediments from site 96-1. Site 96-1 is analogous to site IR-3 in that it was determined to be within the Fe(III)-reducing zone of the aquifer and to actively degrade benzene under in situ conditions (4). 