The PLFA analysis also suggested that there was an enrichment of Geobacteraceae at site IR-3. However, the PLFA data further indicated that there was a general increase in the microbial population at site IR-3, suggesting that, in addition toGeobacteraceae, other microorganisms were also enriched at this site. Therefore, in order to more fully explore the microbial populations that might be involved in benzene degradation, the microbial community was analyzed in more detail with DGGE. Comparison of overall bacterial diversity with DGGE.Although PCR-DGGE analysis has several potential limitations (13, 18,50), this approach was clearly effective in identifying the major shifts in the microbial community in the Bemidji aquifer. In an attempt to avoid biases, primers that targeted bacteria were employed under low-stringency conditions at annealing temperatures with a minimum number of amplification cycles. It seems likely from analysis of triplicate sediment DNA extractions that any PCR biases inherent in this approach were consistent between samples and thus differences in DGGE profiles between sites reflected major differences in the composition of the environmental DNA templates. The fairly simple DGGE patterns obtained with domain-level primers suggests that relatively few species dominated at each of the Bemidji sites, especially at the uncontaminated site. This conclusion is also supported by community PLFA profiles, which exhibited relatively low diversity compared to surficial soils. The apparent simplicity of these subsurface microbial communities is not surprising given the low availability of organic carbon and nutrients generally found in subsurface sediments (3, 5, 16). Other studies of phylogenetic diversity in subsurface microbial communities have also indicated relatively low levels of diversity (8, 36) compared to surficial soil communities (9, 15, 41). The DGGE profiles indicated that the microbial community composition differed markedly among the aerobic, Fe(III)-reducing, and methanogenic zones of the aquifer. In addition to different bands predominating in samples from each TEAP zone, more bands were recovered from all of the contaminated sediments than from the uncontaminated sediments. These results suggest that different microorganisms have a selective advantage in different TEAP zones and that the BTEX contaminants stimulated the growth of microorganisms that were not dominant members of the microbial community in the uncontaminated sediments. It is likely that dominant microorganisms that grew in response to the BTEX input were involved in BTEX degradation. However, organic matter produced by the BTEX degraders could provide substrates for the growth of lesser quantities of other organisms. Enrichment of Geobacter spp. in the zone of benzene degradation.In accord with the MPN-PCR results withGeobacteraceae primers, the DGGE analysis of the sediments with bacterial PCR primers suggested that the IR-3 sediments in which benzene was actively degraded were enriched withGeobacteraceae. Several Geobacteraceae bands such as Geo-83 and Geo-125 (which was almost identical to Geo-83) had much higher intensity at site IR-3 than at site IR-1 or IR-2, and these bands were not detected in sediments from the uncontaminated or methanogenic sites. Geo-83 and the closely related sequences represent a distinct group in the Geobacter cluster within the familyGeobacteraceae (Fig. 5). A more detailed evaluation of the diversity of Geobacteraceae with primers specific for this family further demonstrated the enrichment of the Geobactercluster at site IR-3 and suggested that these organisms were not present in the uncontaminated sediments. The only sequences that were recovered from the uncontaminated sediments withGeobacteraceae-targeted primers were not closely related to known Geobacteraceae spp. The finding that there is a specific enrichment of Geobacterspp. in the zone of benzene degradation is of interest becauseGeobacter spp. are the only organisms in pure culture that have been reported to oxidize aromatic compounds to carbon dioxide (28). Although no pure cultures have been found to degrade benzene, as reported here, a Geobacter sp. closely related to the sequences that predominated in the benzene degradation zone was a dominant organism in the benzene-oxidizing, Fe(III)-reducing enrichment culture (Benz-76). A benzene-degrading enrichment culture could only be established with sediments from the zone of benzene degradation and not from the uncontaminated sediments, which lack theGeobacter spp. that predominate in the zone of benzene degradation. 