1995; Edwards et al. 1992). Considerably more nitrate than sulfate is required to oxidise one mole of toluene. Given the average amount of each electron acceptor available in the groundwater, sulfate reduction will be the more important electron accepting process in this aquifer, despite the preferential use of nitrate as an electron acceptor by microbial populations conducting anaerobic respiration. In the plume, the concomitant depletion of sulfate with toluene, and the lack of detectable methane suggests sulfate reduction is the most significant terminal electron accepting process for the dissolved components of gasoline in Perth’s groundwaters. The position of multiport sample collection sites, and contours for concentrations of (a) benzene, (b) toluene, and (c) sulfate in groundwater after leakage of gasoline from an underground storage tank. (Reproduced from Davis et al. (1999) with the permission of the authors and Elsevier Science B.V.) in the concentration of carbonate ions in the plume relative to the concentration in the background groundwater (Table 1) is also consistent with sulfate reduction (Equation (2)). What is disturbing, from a human and environmental health point of view, is that there was no evidence in this plume of benzene degradation linked to sulfate reduction (Figure 2). Degradation in columns, and field tracer tests Given the geochemical characteristics of the plume, and the inference that toluene but not benzene was undergoing anaerobic mineralisation, work was conducted in saturated columns of aquifer material in order to confirm or negate the field observations. In these studies, benzene was degraded under aerobic conditions, but not under nitrate-reducing or sulfatereducing conditions over 133 days, even in the absence of other hydrocarbons (Patterson et al. 1993). Toluene rapidly degraded under nitrate-reducing conditions, within 31 days, and also showed concomitant degradation with sulfate depletion in groundwater that was not amended with nitrate (Patterson et al. 1993). Thierrin et al. (1993) conducted in-plume tracer tests using the deuterated compounds, benzene-d6, toluene-d6, p-xylene-d10 and naphthalene-d8, and bromide as a conservative tracer. After dissolving the compounds in anoxic groundwater that had been collected from the site, they injected the water into the plume (near multiport 3, Figure 2) and monitored the breakthrough of the compounds 17 m down gradient from the injection bore. Degradation of benzene was not significant, as the breakthrough time and relative mass of benzene-d6 recovery was essentially the same as for the conservative tracer. The other compounds showed loss of mass relative to benzene and the tracer. Thierrin et al. (1993) used the analytical transport model SOLUTE to derive first order degradation rates for the plume from the hydrocarbon distribution data and the tracer test and the rates are compared in Table 2. Microbial biomass and community structure – initial investigations An initial brief examination of the microbial populations using fluorescent in situ hybridization probes, specific for Bacteria (EUB338) and species of the genus Desulfovibrio (SRB385) (Amann et al. 1990) was conducted on water drawn from a number of the Table 2. Half-lives (days) for first order degradation rates of gasoline compounds derived from application of the analytical transport model SOLUTE to plume concentration data and data from an in field tracer test (Thierrin et al. 1993). multiports, both from within and outside the plume (S. Toze, pers. comm.). Few cells in the groundwater reacted with either stain, and considerable background autofluorescence prevented any definitive assessment of the microbial community structure. The analysis of the fatty acids from membrane phospholipids has been extensively used in culture independent assessment of microbial communities (White et al. 