This is in contrast to what was observed at the field site, where no significant difference was observed in the hybridization of this probe between the contaminated and the noncontaminated sites. The reason for this difference is unknown at this time. The trend of hybridization to the group I Pseudomonas probe was fundamentally different from that observed with the catabolic probes in the microcosm studies. No apparent inhibition was observed in the higher gasoline concentrations, and no significant enrichment was observed for the 0.5-mg/g treatment. A clear dose-response relationship was observed by the 8-week sampling; hybridization increased with increasing gasoline additions. This trend remained through the 16-week timepoint. These bacteria were of interest due to their importance in the degradation of aromatic hydrocarbons, and many of the genes used in this study were originally cloned from members of the rRNA group I Pseudomonas sp. These data suggest that group I Pseudomonas sp. that harbor genes that do not hybridize with the catabolic probes used in this study are present in this soil, and that the majority of these strains are less sensitive to high concentrations of gasoline than are the hosts of the probes used here. The rapid and significant increase in hybridization with these probes (except in the 0.5-mg/g treatment) suggests that these strains are utilizing gasoline components as a nutrient source, and that the genetic systems harbored by these organisms may be important in the remediation of high levels of gasoline contamination that would inhibit the hosts of the probes used in this study. There are a number of criteria by which a suitable indicator of community adaptation to a contaminant might be judged, including (1) the sensitivity of the indicator to small amounts of the contaminant; (2) the ease in distinguishing background levels of the indicator from levels associated with the contaminant; (3) the return of the indicator to background levels soon after the removal of the contaminant; and (4) the generality of the indicator in a variety of soils. This work has shown that sequences hybridizing to xylE are sensitive indicators of contamination and the adaptation of soil microbial communities to exposure to low levels of gasoline contamination. The microcosm studies were in agreement with the field studies for this probe and indicated that levels of 0.5 mg gasoline/g were sufficient to enrich soil communities in these sequences. This enrichment did not persist in the microcosms for long periods of time following the disappearance of aromatic hydrocarbons, indicating that these sequences return to background levels soon after the gasoline has been removed. Hybridization of sequences to this gene may be a useful indicator of the extent of remediation of a gasoline contaminated site. Molecular Indicators of Adaptation 185 The xylE probe was not a sensitive indicator of high levels of contamination, however, due to the probable inhibition of the hosts of these sequences at higher concentrations of gasoline. The group I Pseudomonas probe was more sensitive at the higher hydrocarbon concentration treatments in the microcosm studies, although this was not true of the field site. This discrepancy may indicate that there are unknown ecological factors not related to gasoline contamination that affect the concentrations of these sequences, and this probe is less likely to be a reliable general indicator of contamination than the xylE probe. 