Probes were labeled with 32P by random priming (GIBCO-BRL; Grand Island, N.Y.), according to the vendor’s instructions, to a specific activity of >108 cpm/µg. The membrane was prehybridized at 42°C in 5× Denhardt’s solution, 5× SSPE (Stock solution of 20× SSPE is 175.3 g NaCl, 27.6 g NaH2PO4 z H2O, 7.4 g EDTA per liter), 50% formamide, 1% SDS, and 200 µg of denatured salmon sperm DNA per milliliter [23]. Hybridization was performed for at least 24 h at the same temperature by adding denatured 32P-labeled probe. The membrane was washed twice with 1× SSPE, 1% SDS for 15 min at 55°C, and twice with 0.1 1× SSPE, 0.1% SDS for 15 min at 68°C. The washed filters were exposed to preflashed X-ray film (Amersham, Arlington Heights, Il.) at −70°C with a cassette (Halesy X-ray Products Inc., Brooklyn, N.Y. [23]. Autoradiographs were analyzed with a video camera (Model, TM-TCN, Pulnix America Inc., Sunnyvale, Calif.) and NIH Image 1.52 program (National Institute of Health, Washington, D.C.). Quantitations of the DNA sequences homologous to gene probes in soil sample DNA were determined by using a regression equation based on a range of masses of positive control DNA. The limit of detection for all hybridizations was less than 1 pg positive control DNA. Hybridization data were expressed as mass equivalents of the probes hybridized against themselves. This is not necessarily equivalent to the masses of the target genes in the samples due to the possibility of heterologous hybridization with related, but different and unknown, genes. Expressing the hybridization data in terms of massequivalents of the target genes is a convenient means of comparing quantitative differences in hybridization between different samples and different genes. Stringencies of washing were maintained high in all cases, and no cross-hybridization was observed between any of the probes used in this study. Hybridization data are presented in two ways: (1) the mass equivalents per gram of soil (Table 2), and (2) the mass equivalents per microgram of total DNA (Table 3). Normalization of mass equivalents per gram of soil represents the absolute concentration of the hybridization-positive sequences in the soil, while normalization of mass equivalents to the mass of total DNA is an indicator of enrichment of the sequences within the community, regardless of whether the Hybridization normalized per microgram total DNA is presented in Table 3. Results were similar to those normalized per gram of soil, with the exception of the nahA probe, which was not significantly higher in the contaminated samples at the (P = 0.05 level). The standard errors in the nahA measurements were higher when normalized per microgram DNA than when normalized per gram soil. This relatively high variability probably resulted in a lack of significant difference at the P = 0.05 level. It should be noted that, in many cases, the standard error was higher when the data were normalized per microgram DNA than when normalized per gram of soil. This may be due to variability in measurement of soil DNA by fluorometry. Correlation Between Aromatic Residues and Catabolic Genes No linear relationships were found between the concentrations of these hydrocarbons and the genes tested (data not shown), although a nonlinear relationship did appear to exist between the summation of the concentrations of all of these aromatic hydrocarbons and the extent of hybridization of xylE (Fig. 2). Hybridization of xylE increased with increasing aromatic concentration up to approximately 100 mg aromatics/g soil. Above that concentration, the hybridization of xylE generally decreased. Sequences hybridizing to the nahA gene were enriched in response to increasing concentrations of gasoline in the microcosms (Fig. 3). Increases of mass-equivalent concentrations on a microgram per gram-of-soil basis were observed in all gasoline treatments. Maximum hybridization was observed at 4 week’s incubation for the lowest gasoline concentration (0.5 mg/g soil) and the intermediate gasoline ranges (5, 35, and 75 mg/g soil) (Fig. 3). 