A cluster formed at the maximum hybridization in the intermediate gasoline treatments at 4 weeks, suggesting that the naphthalene utilizers were limited by resources other than naphthalene in the soil. At both the lowest and highest gasoline treatments, the maximum concentrations were lower than those at the intermediate gasoline ranges (Fig. 3). This may have resulted from the inhibition of organisms containing the target sequences by toxic components in the highest treatment, and from the deficiency of C in the lowest hydrocarbon treatment. The amount of hybridization decreased in all treatments after 4 weeks’ incubation time. The amount of hybridization at the lower gasoline treatments (0.5 and 5 mg gasoline/g soil) returned to below the detection limit (1 pg/ µg DNA) by 8 weeks, and the two middle-range treatments were at or below the detectable level. In contrast, hybridization was maintained at relatively high levels at the higher gasoline treatments (75 and 125 mg) at the 16-week incubation time. Among the genes involved in degradation of toluene and its metabolites, a much higher level of hybridization was observed with the xylE gene probe (Fig. 4) than with either tmoABCDE or todC1C2BA (data not shown). The extent of hybridization increased with increasing gasoline dosages for the 0.5-, 5- and 35-mg/g treatments, and the maximum hybridization occurred at 4 weeks for these treatments. A decreasing trend was observed with increasing gasoline concentrations at 75- and the 125-mg/g treatments at the 4-week incubation, indicating that there may have been increasing inhibition at the higher dosages. This inhibition may have been alleviated during the later timepoints due to degradation and volatilization, as indicated by the rise in hybridization at the later timepoints. The tmoABCDE probe hybridized to a significantly lower extent than did the xylE genes (data not shown). A doseresponse effect at the lower gasoline dosages and a toxic effect at the higher gasoline dosages were observed similar to that with the xylE probe. Hybridization of the todC1C2BA probe followed a similar trend to the tmoABCDE and xylE probes, although todC1C2BA was higher at all dosages and timepoints than the tmoABCDE gene (data not shown). The trends of sequences hybridizing to the 23S rRNA of group 1 Pseudomonas sp. were different than for the catabolic genes (Fig. 5). There was no clear dose-response relationship between hybridization and dosage until the 6-week timepoint, and the highest amount of hybridization was observed with the 125-mg treatment level at almost all timepoints. The maximum hybridization was observed at the Fig. 2. Relationship between concentrations of total aromatic compounds (toluene, xylenes, and naphthalene) and hybridization with xylE. Fig. 3. Microcosm DNA hybridization with nahA gene probe. Various rates of gasoline (from 0 to 125 mg gasoline/g soil) were added to 500 g soil. Extent of hybridization is represented as pgpositive control DNA per µg total DNA. Error bars represent ± 1 standard deviation based on three replicates. We used a battery of gene probes in conjunction with direct DNA extraction from soil to monitor changes occurring in soil microbial communities exposed to petroleum contamination in field and microcosm studies. 