Several genes were selected as probes on the basis of their encoded enzyme activities involved in catabolism of common fuel oil components such as BTEX compounds, naphthalene, and alkanes. One gene fragment was chosen as an indicator of the presence of rRNA group I Pseudomonas species, a group of bacteria frequently associated with the degradation of aromatic compounds. The field site chosen for these studies had a history of hydrocarbon exposure due to leaking underground storage tanks, dating back to the turn of the century. As expected, samples taken from soils contaminated with fuel oil (as determined by analysis of toluene, xylenes, ethylbenzene, and naphthalene by gas chromatography) were significantly enriched in several of the bacterial genes that encode enzymes that catabolize these compounds. DNA from the contaminated samples was significantly enriched in most of these genes, relative to DNA from the noncontaminated site. The highest level of significance (P = 0.01) between contaminated and noncontaminated soils was observed with xylE, which encodes catechol-2,3-dioxygenase from the TOL plasmid, pWW0. The pathway encoded by pWW0 attacks xylenes, which were a major component of the gasoline present in these soils. The absence of hybridization of any samples with the alkB gene was somewhat surprising, since alkanes make up a significant proportion of gasoline hydrocarbons, but it is not unprecedented. Berthelet and Greer [4] studied samples taken from 35 sites contaminated with fuel oil and found that approximately 33% of these sites did not yield amplification products with PCR primers directed toward this gene. The observation that most of the catabolic genes used in this study hybridized to DNA from noncontaminated samples was expected. These genes are likely to be widely distributed in soils and may be involved in the utilization of similar aromatic compounds released from soil organic matter. The fact that they are enriched in the contaminated sites is reflective of the higher concentrations of the primary substrates present in the contaminated sites. A linear relationship was not observed between the extent of hybridization of the catabolic genes and the concentrations of the measured aromatic hydrocarbons detected (for example, see Fig. 2) at all concentrations in the field studies. A linear increase between the concentrations of the measured aromatics and hybridization of xylE existed up to approximately 100 µg/g, but hybridization rapidly decreased as a function of aromatic compound concentration above this level. Short-chain hydrocarbons present in gasoline are toxic to microorganism [2], and it is likely that this toxicity inhibited the hosts of these genes at high concentrations. Inhibition was also observed in the microcosm studies at the higher concentrations (greater than 75 mg gasoline added per gram of soil). In our study, 75 mg gasoline used in the microcosms contained 197.7 µg aromatic hydrocarbons/g gasoline. This corresponds to 14,827.5 µg of the measured aromatics added per gram of soil, or over 100 times the level observed for inhibition in the field studies. A number of factors may explain this difference, including the following: (1) the field site was very old, and it is likely that simple aromatics had been degraded to a greater extent than the more toxic short-chain alkanes over the long period of contamination; (2) the composition of the gasoline applied to the microcosms was probably different from that released at the field site; and (3) the microcosms were an open system and therefore subject to volatilization. We did not monitor loss of the gasoline throughout the course of the experiment, and it is likely that the concentration of gasoline components decreased soon after application, due to volatilization. A range of concentrations of gasoline were applied to the microcosms in hopes of determining the lowest amount of gasoline required for observation of a significant increase in the hybridization of the gene probes. The lowest concentration used in these experiments was 0.5 mg gasoline/g soil, and a measurable increase in hybridization to all catabolic genes (except alkB, which was not included in the microcosm studies) was observed at this level. Hybridization intensity of all catabolic genes had either returned to background levels, or was approaching background levels, following 16 weeks’ incubation of the 0.5, 5, and 35 mg gasoline/g treatments. No toluene, xylenes, or naphthalene were detected in any treatment at the 16-week sampling. It is likely that all of the aromatic compounds utilized as nutrient sources for these organisms had either been degraded or volatilized before the 16-week time point. In contrast, hybridization in the 75- and 125-mg/g treatments were at their highest levels at the 16-week timepoint, suggesting that the growth of the hosts of these genes was probably inhibited at the higher concentrations until the toxins were either degraded or volatilized. Then, these organisms would have responded to the added carbon sources. Since none of the primary substrates of these genes were detected at the 16- week timepoint in these studies, it is likely that the levels of hybridization in these treatments would approach background levels if the experiment had been extended several weeks. 