H20; 3.53 mg of Fe (NH4)2(SO4)2 6H2O; 0.039 mg of CuSO4 5H2O; 0.021 mg of ZnCl2; 0.041 mg of CoCl2 6H20; and 0.025 mg of Na2MoO4 2H2O. The medium was adjusted to pH 7.2 with 1 N NaOH. Use of 0.8% (wt/vol) purified agar (Becton Dickinson Microbiology Systems, Cockeysville, Md.) to prepare HCMM2 plates was essential in obtaining low background colony counts. Plates were prepared in duplicate, maintained at room temperature (about 23°C) in sealed plastic containers (Rubbermaid, Inc., Wooster, Ohio) for 2 weeks, and examined at intervals for colony formation. Hydrocarbon vapors for growth were supplied by an open vial of unleaded gasoline placed in the plastic containers; HCMM2 plates incubated in this manner are hereafter referred to as HCMM2-gasoline. The use of granular-activated carbon was eventually abandoned when it was found to be ineffective at reducing background counts. Colony counts on control plates were typically less than 0.1 CFU/ml. To isolate bacteria from aquifer core materials, 5.0 g of material was aseptically added to 100 ml of sterile HCMM2 broth amended with 0.1% (wt/vol) sodium pyrophosphate (3, 12). The resulting slurry was homogenized for approximately 30 s at high speed in a Waring blender equipped with a sterile, stainless steel microblender head. Aliquots were removed from the supernatant phase of the homogenized suspension for bacterial isolation on HCMM2-gasoline, as described above. Some gasoline-degrading bacteria used in this study were obtained from an enrichment culture which had been inoculated with groundwater from well 30 (Table 1). The enrichment culture was prepared in a 100-ml sterile septum vial containing 50 ml of sterile HCMM2 broth supplemented with 0.1% (vol/vol) unleaded gasoline. Following inoculation with 5.0 ml of groundwater from well 30, the vial was sealed and incubated with shaking at ambient temperature (about 230C). After 1 week, the vial was unsealed and gasoline-degrading bacteria were isolated as described above. Catabolic screening of gasoline-degrading isolates. Gasoline-degrading bacteria were subcultured from initial isolation plates to fresh HCMM2-gasoline plates, twice checked for purity by restreaking on the same medium, and stored frozen on sterile Whatman filter disks at -120°C. Isolates were screened (in duplicate) for growth on each of 15 common gasoline hydrocarbons (Table 2). All test hydrocarbons were anhydrous and of spectrophotometric grade and were rated at >99.0%, with the exception of o-xylene and methylcyclopentane, which were rated at >97.0% and >98.0%, respectively. A Varian model 3400 gas chromatograph (GC) equipped with a flame ionization detector (FID; Varian, Inc., Sunnyvale, Calif.) and a 30-m DB624 megabore column (J. W. Scientific, Folsom, Calif.) was used to confirm reported purities of and identify contaminants in toluene, ethylbenzene, methylcyclopentane, and o-xylene (Table 2). Unstable or hygroscopic hydrocarbons (e.g., octane, ethylbenzene, o-xylene, and p-xylene) were stored under nitrogen for the duration of the study. Isolates were toothpicked from stock cultures (grown on HCMM2-gasoline) onto fresh HCMM2 agar and exposed to single-hydrocarbon vapors in sealed chambers (e.g., HCMM2-benzene). Chambers consisted of 4-liter widemouthed glass jars fitted with Teflon-lined screw-cap lids. Each jar contained a hydrocarbon vapor generator consisting of a standard 20-ml glass liquid scintillation vial filled with cotton soaked in the appropriate hydrocarbon and capped with a Teflon-lined septum. The septum was pierced with a 22-gauge hypodermic needle to provide a gradual release of hydrocarbon vapor to the chamber atmosphere. Gas chromatographic analyses indicated that the amount of ethylbenzene which dissolved into sterile HCMM2 broth (in a petri dish placed within a chamber) increased linearly from 0.018 ,uM/ml to 0.08 VLM/ml between 8 and 145 h (unpublished data). All plates were incubated at room temperature (about 23°C) for up to 2 weeks and examined at intervals for bacterial growth. Growth on a negative-control plate nullified use of that particular isolate in the study. Absence of growth on R2A or HCMM2- gasoline plates was interpreted as failure to transfer cells to the experimental hydrocarbon plates, and results were rejected for all plates in the series. 