The extract was analyzed using a Hewlett-Packard 5890 Series II gas chromatograph equipped with a flame ionization detector (HewlettPackard, Avondale, PA) and a 30 m × 0.32 mm DBWax capillary column (J&W Scientific, Folsom, CA). Nitrate and sulfate were measured on a Dionex model 100 ion chromatograph (Sunnyvale, CA) equipped with an IonPac AS9-SC column and a conductivity detector. The eluent was 2 mM Na2CO3, 0.75 mM NaHCO3 at a flow rate of 2 ml min−1. Ions were quantitated by comparison with external standards using a Chrome-Jet integrator (SpectraPhysics, San Jose, CA). The production of methane was checked by withdrawing a 0.25 ml sample of the headspace gas with a gas-tight syringe (Precision Sampling, Baton Rouge, La.) which had been flushed with Argon, and analyzing it on a model 1200 gas partitioner (Fisher Scientific, Pittsburgh, Pa.). The results are summarized in Table 2. Degradation did not occur in any of the cultures from the BML sediment, and only one compound (toluene) was degraded in the TKT cultures (site water) (data not shown). Both of these sites are characterized by a lack of pollution history, low organic matter content and relatively low nutrient concentrations (Table 1). In contrast, BTEX loss was extensive in cultures established from the heavily polluted, high organic matter, Arthur Kill and Onondaga Lake sites. Activity was especially rapid in the nitrate amended cultures of both polluted sites (AK and OL). Toluene, m-xylene and ethylbenzene were all lost, with no apparent lag, in both sets of enrichments (Figure 1A). However, no subsequent loss of the other compounds was observed in the AK cultures, and only p-xylene was lost (after a very long lag period) in the OL cultures. The pattern of degradation was the same in both sediments. Toluene, and m-xylene in OL, was lost within the initial 21 days of incubation. These were followed closely by ethylbenzene. There was also a small (∼20–40%) decrease in the concentration of o-xylene during the first three weeks, possibly due to cometabolism. In the sulfate amended enrichments, degradation of BTEX began more slowly, but in the case of AK, proceeded to completion for all six of the substrates (Figure 1B). The same pattern was seen in the site water cultures (Figure 1C) which were actively sul- fidogenic. Toluene was degraded first, followed by oand m-xylene, then p-xylene and ethylbenzene, and fi- nally benzene. In the sulfate-reducing OL enrichments (Figure 1B), only toluene and m-xylene were degraded during the course of the experiment. As expected, the only methanogenic cultures which were active at degrading BTEX were those derived from freshwater (OL) sediment (Figure 1D), this includes the site water enrichment. toluene and ethylbenzene were lost during the 161 day incubation. When these same cultures were checked after 371 days, o-xylene loss was also seen (data not shown). Iron-reducing cultures (Figure 1E) demonstrated the ability to degrade toluene (AK and OL) and pxylene (AK) or m-xylene and o-xylene (OL). There was also some loss of ethylbenzene, m-xylene and o-xylene in the AK enrichment but the results were inconsistent. The concentrations of nitrate and sulfate were measured in the denitrifying and sulfidogenic (including AK site water) cultures at the beginning and end of the incubation. In those cultures where BTEX degradation had taken place, the amount of electron acceptor loss in fed cultures above that in un-fed backgrounds was compared to the amount of loss that would be expected if all the BTEX were mineralized to CO2. The results are shown in Table 3. 