In contrast to the clone library derived from the bacterial community associated with the lava granules, the most dominant phylotype of the sand consortium clone library with 14.7% of all clones was an Epsilonproteobacterium related to the genus Sulfurovum, followed by Desulfovibrio with 10.5%. The phylogenetic position of the Desulfovibrio sequences and other deltaproteobacterial sequences is shown in Fig. 3. The third prominent phylotype in the clone library with a proportion of 6.5% was the member of the Cryptanaerobacter/Pelotomaculum that had also been found on the lava granules (Fig. 2). The remaining phylotypes identified in the clone library of ZzBs1-4 were assigned to several Deltaproteobacteria (see Fig. 3) and to the Actinobacteria (Coriobacteriaceae, Rubrobacteraceae, Cellulomonadaceae), Chloroflexi, Bacteroidetes (Sphingobacteriaceae), Clostridia (Acetivibrio), Epsilonproteobacteria (Campylobacteraceae), Chlorobi, Caldithrix and the candidate phyla OP3, OP8, OP11 and WS1 (data not shown). The phylogenetic composition of the consortium derived from the ARDRA patterns was verified by T-RFLP analysis applying three different restriction enzymes. As shown in Fig. 5, the T-RFLP analysis confirmed that the most dominant phylotype was the Sulfurovum-like organism, which was even under-represented in the clone library. The relative T-RF abundances of several Deltaproteobacteria were also higher than the percentages of these phylotypes according to the clone library. This bias might be explained by the use of different restriction enzymes and by the different phylogenetic resolution of ARDRA and T-RFLP analysis. As ARDRA relies on all restriction sites within the 16S rRNA gene amplicon, it also distinguishes highly similar but not identical sequence types, leading to an underestimation of phylogenetic groups with high micro-heterogeneity. Nevertheless, the proportion of the Cryptanaerobacter/Pelotomaculum phylotype was consistently determined to be 5% and 7% with both methods. Community dynamics of consortium ZzBs1-4 upon shifts to different aromatic substrates Besides benzene, the consortium derived from sand columns degraded toluene, all xylene isomers, phenol, benzoate or acetate if added as single substrates, coupled with the production of sulfide (data not shown). Benzoate, phenol and toluene are putative intermediates of the anaerobic degradation pathway(s) of benzene. For this reason, we set up microcosms spiked repeatedly with either benzene, phenol, benzoate or toluene as the sole source of carbon and energy and monitored the developing community compositions. All compounds were degraded under sulfate-reducing conditions (Fig. 4). No sulfide was formed in the absence of substrates, and no substrate depletion was observed in the sterile controls (data not shown). The stoichiometry of oxidized substrate and produced sulfide indicated that phenol was mineralized. For benzene and benzoate as substrates, sulfide production was slightly lower than expected for complete substrate oxidation; for toluene, which had been added at the lowest concentration, no production of sulfide was observed. However, care must be taken when interpreting the stoichiometries of the oxidized substrate and sulfide produced in our microcosms, because sulfide can precipitate as FeS or Fe2S coatings on sand particles, as observed previously (Herrmann et al., 2008; Vogt et al., 2007). Benzene was degraded at a rate of 5.22 μM day−1. Benzoate and phenol were degraded considerably faster at rates of 33.68 and 17.5 μM day−1, respectively. Likewise, toluene was depleted faster than benzene (7.1 μM day−1). After 120 and 270 days of cultivation on the different substrates, DNA was extracted from the sand material and used for T-RFLP analyses to assess changes in the phylogenetic composition of the consortium due to the degradation of the different carbon sources. As shown in Fig. 6, the Cryptanaerobacter/Pelotomaculum phylotype decreased in its relative T-RF abundance after cultivation on toluene, benzoate and phenol, and significantly increased when benzene was used as a substrate. 