Several of the observed bands appeared to be shared between samples, but the majority were unique for each sample site. Bands which were clearly separated from neighboring bands and were easily visualized were isolated for sequencing (Fig. 1). Sequences of 300–450 bp were obtained from all of the isolated bands. The highest similarity for each of the 22 sequenced bands, obtained by BLAST and FASTA comparisons, is shown in Table 2. The range of similarity to reference sequences contained in the databases was 86.1% (A11) to 100.0% (A2). The majority of the isolated bands were sequenced with relative ease and minimal background interference, suggesting that each band represented a unique microorganism. Several isolated bands were not amenable to sequencing due to high levels of background in the sequencing reaction. This result suggests that these bands were actually composites, made up of two or more distinct sequences which possess similar electrophoretic mobility under the conditions used for DGGE [10,23]. Assuming that several of the bands visualized in each sample are composites of distinct 16S rDNA fragments originating from different bacterial species, the bacterial diversity of the samples, as estimated by the total number of discernible bands in the DGGE gels for each site, is underestimated. DGGE gel of 16S rDNA amplification fragments and corresponding bands isolated for sequencing. PCR fragments were separated on a DGGE gel using a denaturant gradient of 40–60%. Inset at the bottom of lanes A1, A2, and A3 demonstrates bands A10 and A20 which were difficult to photograph. Bands which were successfully isolated and sequenced are shown in their corresponding positions. Phylogenetic analysis of the sequences (Fig. 2) revealed that the bacterial diversity present in the different soils was broad, being distributed between the Actinomycetales (63.6%) [34] and Proteobacteria (36.4%) [24]. Within each of these groups, the distribution was also widespread. Within the Actinomycetales, 33.3% of the sequences belonged to the Micrococcineae suborder, and included, in part, the genera Arthrobacter, Cellulomonas, and Clavibacter. The second largest group was formed by the Nocardioidaceae (25%). There was a single sequence found within the Corynebacterineae, which was positioned between the genera Rhodococcus and Williamsia. Phylogenetic tree of sequences obtained from 16S rDNA amplification fragments separated by DGGE gel. All of the sequences grouped into either the high G+C Gram-positives or Gram-negative Proteobacteria. DGGE bands are designated as shown in Fig. 1 and reference sequences used are shown with their respective GenBank accession numbers. Bar, sequence dissimilarity. Within the Proteobacteria, the γ subdivision was predominant (62.5%), composed in part by the genera Xanthomonas, Halomonas, and Methylobacter. The α subdivision comprised 25% of the Proteobacteria observed, and included the genera Methylobacterium, Sphingomonas, and Erythrobacter. Two other sequences (K6A and K11) possessed significant sequence similarity to the δ subdivision genera Geobacter and Pelobacter. Sequence A11 was the only sequence to show similarity to the β group, although it was somewhat distant at only 86%. 