The arrows indicate the only band that comigrated for the inoculum and the bioaugmented soil. Previous Section Next Section DISCUSSION A creosote-contaminated soil from a wood treatment facility that had been operating for at least 30 years was the subject of the present study. A high proportion of PAH-degrading bacteria at the beginning of the experiment (Fig. 1) and the absence of a lag phase at the beginning of TPH degradation (data not shown) revealed the presence of a preadapted PAH-degrading microbial population in the original soil. Effects of different treatments on the degradation of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons.The kinetics of TPH degradation displayed a biphasic pattern for all bioremediation treatments. This behavior may have been due to a number of factors, such as a decrease in PAH bioavailability (3), accumulation of toxic PAH metabolites (11), or enrichment of more recalcitrant compounds (30). In a parallel study, a decrease in bioavailability was demonstrated (31). The accumulation of metabolites resulting from oxidation of PAHs can reduce the viability of several PAH degraders in addition to inhibiting the degradation of PAH (11, 20, 21). Nevertheless, this probably was not the case in this study, because polar metabolites determined by gas chromatography-mass spectrometry of the derivatized polar fraction did not accumulate in the soil (31). In addition, leachates from the soil after the different treatments showed that there was a reduction in soil toxicity, as determined by Microtox (31). Taking into account the finding that in the original dry soil (water content, 1.6%) the TPH concentration was not reduced during the experiment, water content and aeration became the key factors for soil bioremediation. The quantities of nutrients added in our treatments, taking into account only the inorganic nitrogen forms, were established in order to obtain a molar C/N/P ratio of 300:10:1. The required quantities were added at three times during the experiment in order to avoid inhibition caused by a drastic osmotic change, as has been described elsewhere (38). Recently, Atagana (7) described the ratio used in this study as optimal for a creosote-contaminated soil. As shown in Table 3, our results suggest that nutrient addition had a negative effect on late-stage biodegradation of four-ring PAHs and TPHs. The presence of an excess of nutrients could have inhibited the biodegradation of high-molecular-weight PAHs. In fact, Rhykerd et al. (27) described a reduction in bioremediation of a motor oil due to an increase in the salinity produced by NaCl, and Braddock et al. (10) attributed a reduction in the microbial activity of an Arctic hydrocarbon-contaminated soil to the salinity produced by an excess of nutrients. In a recent study, Roling-Wilfred et al. (29) suggested that the addition of nutrients implies that there are differences in hydrocarbon biodegradation rates and variations in the microbial population. Therefore, for the present study, the differential microbial population shifts due to different inorganic nutrient contents may also explain the different biodegradation capabilities observed for biostimulation treatments with and without nutrient addition. Response of the microbial population to bioremediation of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons.At early stages (0 to 45 days) of the bioremediation process, the addition of nutrients caused significant increases in both the heterotrophic and PAH-degrading microbial populations, while soil stimulated only by aeration and optimum humidity exhibited smaller increases in the sizes of both populations and a marked delay in the increase in microbial PAH degraders (Fig. 1). This difference in behavior is consistent with the kinetics of TPH depletion observed during the early stage (Table 2). As shown in Table 2, a higher TPH degradation rate was observed for treatments to which nutrients were added. In contrast, the proportion of the PAH-degrading microbial population compared to the heterotrophic population for the treatment without nutrients increased noticeably at 21 and 45 days and reached 100% at 135 days, while lower proportions were observed for treatments with nutrients (Fig. 1). In addition, at the end of the experiment a larger PAH-degrading microbial population was observed for the treatment without nutrients. 