The nitrogen concentrations in the plots treated with liquid fertilizer were higher than the concentrations in the unfertilized oil-treated plots only immediately after the weekly fertilization. No effect of block position on nutrient concentration was observed. Effects of bioremediation on oil degradation.Oil degradation was assessed by measuring carbon dioxide evolution and determining changes in oil composition. Carbon dioxide evolution was monitored intensively during the first 14 days of the experiment. One day after fertilizer treatment, high rates of carbon dioxide production were observed for the plots treated with slow-release fertilizer, as well as for the liquid fertilizer-treated plot in block 3 (Fig. 1A). Large fluctuations in carbon dioxide evolution occurred over time (Fig. 1A); these appeared to be related to lunar cycle-induced differences in tidal height and plot-covering times (data not shown). The observed fluctuations resulted in large standard deviations for the average daily carbon dioxide evolution rates (Fig. 1B). None of the other liquid fertilizer-treated plots and none of the oil-treated and non-oil-treated control plots showed elevated carbon dioxide production. Two-way analysis of variance of data that were log transformed (in order to obtain normal distribution of data) revealed significant effects of both treatment and block (P < 0.001) on carbon dioxide production. CO2 production was significantly greater in block 3 than in block 1 (P < 0.001) (Fig. 1B). Bioremediation treatment had positive effects on CO2 production (Fig. 1); CO2 production was greater with the slow-release fertilizer treatment than with the other three treatments (P < 0.001). Also, the CO2 production in the plots treated with liquid fertilizer was greater than that in the oil-treated and non-oil-treated control plots (P < 0.001). However, the carbon dioxide production in the oil-treated control was not significantly greater than that in the non-oil-treated control (P = 0.463). Dissolved oxygen measurements showed that the sediment remained oxygenated (data not shown). Oil composition was determined at zero time and 80 and 315 days after fertilization. Non-oil-treated plots were found to contain some oil, but the amounts were negligible compared to the amount applied to the oil-treated plots (<1% of the amount added to the oil-treated plots). Significant biodegradation (P < 0.001) of total petroleum hydrocarbons (Fig. 2), total resolvable hydrocarbons, n-C11 to n-C31 alkanes, and substituted and unsubstituted naphthalenes was observed for all oil-treated plots. Substituted and unsubstituted phenanthrenes and benzothiophenes were not significantly degraded (P > 0.05) in any of the nine oil-treated plots for almost 1 year. No effect of block position on oil degradation was evident. Significant differences were observed between the different treatments after 80 days, but the differences were no longer significant after 315 days, when the plots had not received fertilizer treatment for 215 days (Fig. 2). After 80 days, the hydrocarbon degradation in the plots treated with liquid fertilizer was significantly greater than that in the oil-treated control plots (P < 0.01). Surprisingly, in view of the CO2 evolution during the first 14 days (Fig. 