Remarkably, 11 days after treatment with slow-release fertilizer the community structure in blocks 1 and 3 was temporarily not significantly different from that in the non-oil-treated and oil-treated control plots. In general there were significant (Table 1) and large differences in the bacterial community structure among the three blocks, as shown clearly in Fig. 3B. Comparison of 16S rRNA- and 16S ribosomal DNA-based DGGE.Oil addition alone and treatment with liquid fertilizer appeared to have little effect on the bacterial community structure. We might have expected inhibition of the activity and growth of some community members by oil and stimulation of the activity and growth of other community members. These effects could have been obscured by the DGGE approach in which rRNA gene fragments were amplified, since rRNA gene-based analysis also detects inactive microbes. Reverse transcription of rRNA, followed by PCR and DGGE, was expected to give a more representative view of the active bacterial community. rRNA was isolated from 12 samples taken from the four different treatment plots in block 3, 1, 5 and 11 days after the addition of fertilizer. Samples from this block were used as the highest activities (highest carbon dioxide production rates following addition of fertilizer) (Fig. 1) were observed in this block. The rRNA-based PCR products were analyzed by DGGE next to rRNA gene-derived fragments. The rRNA-based DGGE profiles always resembled the corresponding rRNA gene-derived profiles from the same treatment to some extent (Fig. 4). Although the rRNA- and rRNA gene-derived profiles were similar, they could be distinguished statistically (SD = 0.827 ± 0.063; r = 0.823 ± 0.094). Nevertheless, a between-treatment comparison of rRNA-based DGGE profiles showed that the degree of similarity was not significantly different from that for a comparison of rRNA gene-derived profiles (P > 0.05). This was the case even when samples from plots showing the highest metabolic activity based on carbon dioxide production were analyzed (data not shown). Thus, it was not possible to detect any treatment-associated differences in the bacterial community profiles by 16S rRNA-based analyses that could not be determined from the results of 16S rRNA gene-based DGGE analyses.H Temporal dynamics and phylogenetic analysis of bacterial communities.Time series were analyzed for block 2 in order to detect dynamics in bacterial communities in response to oil pollution and bioremediation treatments. Community fingerprints of the non-oil-treated plots, the oil-treated plots that received no fertilizer, and the oil-treated plots treated with liquid fertilizer showed that there were no major changes over time (Fig. 5A and 6). In contrast, clear changes over time were observed for the bacterial community in the oil-treated plots that were treated with slow-release fertilizer (Fig. 3B and 5B). Nondimensional metric scaling (Fig. 6) revealed a nonsystematic pattern of changes over time, and no clear trend was observed. This may in part have reflected the length of time between sampling events since laboratory microcosm experiments with sediments obtained from the beach studied here and sampled more intensively showed clear successional changes in the bacterial communities (21); also, the observed spatial heterogeneity in the blocks and plots treated with slow-release fertilizer may have contributed to the findings (Table 1). A phylogenetic survey was conducted for the plots treated with slow-release fertilizer. A clone library was constructed from a DNA extract from a block 2 sample taken 11 days after the addition of slow-release fertilizer. This sample was chosen as in the corresponding DGGE track two intense bands were apparent (bands a and b in Fig. 5B). Corresponding bands were also observed in samples taken at other times and/or in other plots treated with slow-release fertilizer (Fig. 