ARDRA profiles and sequences indicative of type C comprised 73 and 36% of the libraries constructed from the 4% N-amended microcosm at day 6 and the oil-only control 0% N microcosm at day 6, respectively. However, they were not detected in any other library. ARDRA profiles and sequences indicative of type D were only found in the libraries from microcosms treated with oil only (0% N) and comprised 4 and 32% of clones analyzed after 6 and 26 days, respectively. A small number of other clones most closely related to microorganisms known to degrade components of crude oil were also detected and are indicated in Table 2. All of these sequences constituted less than 6% of the clones in a library. Trends in carbon dioxide evolution and oil chemistry results clearly indicated that the addition of N and P significantly improved oil degradation, thus showing, as expected (21), that oil degradation was limited by the supply of N and P. Upon repeated fertilization, a temporary increase in carbon dioxide evolution was observed, indicating that, at these time points, N and P were still limiting and other factors did not become limiting during the experiments. The absence of changes in carbon dioxide production in the microcosm that received inorganic nutrients but not oil argues against significant metabolism of C sources other than oil components in the oil-contaminated, nutrient-amended microcosms. Bragg et al. (4) noted a positive relationship between the rate of oil biodegradation and nitrogen concentration in beach sediment pore water, demonstrating that the pore water nutrient content was the most significant factor controlling the rate of oil degradation. Our results concur with this only partly. Nutrient addition did significantly increase the oil biodegradation rate. However, even though the various nutrient amendments resulted in different nutrient levels in the microcosms and initially carbon dioxide production rates correlated with the amount of added inorganic nutrients, over the full period of the experiment, the rates and extent of oil degradation were comparable. Experiments conducted with lower oil concentrations also demonstrated that, above a particular level of nutrient addition, nutrient levels did not further enhance oil biodegradation (3). Furthermore, Lee et al. (29) obtained similar results and showed no significant difference in oil degradation in a field experiment using low and high concentrations of fertilizers, although degradation was higher than in oiled, unamended plots. Reasons for these differences are unknown but may relate to differences in the geology of the beach and therefore different retention characteristics of the inorganic nutrients within the sediment; Bragg et al. (4) studied oil degradation on a cobble beach, while the study by Lee et al. (28) and our study were performed on sandy beach material. Nevertheless, the results indicate that bioremediation should be effective despite the usual patchy oil deposition on a heterogeneous beach after a spill and similarly uneven distribution of inorganic nutrients supplied during bioremediation. N and P were supplied at different concentrations, which, according to resource ratio theory (44), should select different microbial communities dominated by the organisms most capable of utilizing the inorganic nutrients at the levels added to the polluted habitat. In principle, this could offer opportunities to direct oil degradation (21, 37). Clear-cut differences in bacterial community structure were found in microcosms treated with different levels of inorganic nutrients, which appears consistent with the predictions of resource ratio theory. However, statistical analysis of DGGE profiles revealed that the average similarities between DGGE profiles from three independently prepared microcosms receiving the same amount of inorganic nutrients (0.75% N) were not significantly different from the similarities between microcosms subjected to different nutrient amendments. Therefore, it cannot be concluded that the different communities selected resulted from differences in nutrient amendment alone. It is unlikely that heterogeneity within the microcosms, as the result of stratification or poor mixing of oil and sediment/water, contributed significantly to the observed highly variable composition in bacterial community structure between microcosms (only 65% ± 6% similarity). Replicate samples taken at the same time from a single microcosm, which would be subject to the same constraints on mixing and stratification as separate microcosms, were highly reproducible (95% ± 5%). Also, the community profiles between days 6 and 26, after major changes in bacterial communities had occurred, were similar for single microcosms (80% ± 4%). Nevertheless, the results revealed that communities with highly different compositions (similarities of only 58 to 71%) showed similar rates and extents of oil degradation at different nutrient concentrations. This observation may be due largely to the strong selection for a few members of the Alcanivorax/Fundibacter group, which are capable of degrading alkanes (5, 48), a major oil component. 