2C). For all other nutrient-amended microcosms, the amount of carbon dioxide produced after 28 days fell within the average ± the standard deviation of the 0.75% N microcosms (Fig. 2C). Figure 2D shows the percentages of biodegradation of TPH, TRH, nC11-to-nC35 alkanes, and PAH. Significantly greater biodegradation of these compound classes was obtained with all of the bioremediation treatments than with the oil-only control (P < 0.001). TRH, nC11-to-nC35 alkanes, and aromatic hydrocarbons were almost completely removed (91% ±2%, 98% ± 1%, and 92% ± 4%, respectively). No significant differences in TRH, n-alkane, and aromatic hydrocarbon biodegradation were observed between the various nutrient amendments (P > 0.05). However, TPH degradation was significantly greater in the 6% N microcosm than in the 0.25% N, 4% N, and 10% N microcosms (P < 0.05). Carbon dioxide production in the oiled, untreated controls (0% N) was similar (P > 0.05) to that in the unoiled microcosms treated with fertilizer (FO; Fig. 2B and C), in agreement with the absence of significant biodegradation of TPH, TRH, and alkanes (Fig. 2D). Effect of nutrient amendment on bacterial community structure and dynamics.Effect of bioremediation treatments on bacterial community structure was determined by using 16S rDNA-based PCR-DGGE for a number of treatments and sampling times (Table 1). In order to determine relationships between the community fingerprints, similarities were calculated on the basis of the absence or presence of bands (Dice coefficient) and on the basis of whole-track curve densitometric information (Pearson product-moment coefficient). Results based on the two coefficients were comparable; therefore, only the band-based similarities will be described. Analysis of triplicate samples taken from a single microcosm at a single sampling time showed that microbial communities were highly similar (95% ± 5%), indicating low spatial heterogeneity within the microcosms. However, obvious differences in community structure were evident both in time (Fig. 3 and 4) and between different treatments (Fig. 5 and 6). No obvious changes in the composition of the predominant bacterial communities occurred over time in the microcosm treated with fertilizer but no oil (FO). Although DGGE analysis of replicate microcosms for the FO treatment was not conducted in this study, data from a related field experiment that incorporates a fully replicated randomized block design indicate that DGGE profiles from the same beach sediments used in this study and treated with fertilizer only are highly similar over time and between replicate blocks (data not shown). The largest changes occurred in the microcosms remediated with 1 and 4% N (Fig. 4); the average similarity relative to day 0 was significantly lower for these two microcosms than in the other three oiled, nutrient-amended microcosms (P < 0.05). The most dramatic changes in community structure occurred during the first 6 days following oil addition, and profiles between days 6 and 26 were significantly more similar to each other than to profiles obtained from day 0 samples (Fig. 4; P < 0.05), suggesting that, following an initial significant change in community composition, the bacterial community structure remained relatively stable. Nevertheless, for all oiled microcosms, community changes after 6 days were significantly larger than in the microcosm that was not treated with oil (FO) over the same time period (P < 0.05). Similarities (Dice coefficient) in DGGE profiles from microcosms receiving different treatments. Open columns show average similarities of profiles observed at days 6, 13, 20, and 26, relative to day 0, for each treatment. The average values were obtained from pairwise comparisons of DGGE profiles obtained at each time point relative to the time zero sample for each individual treatment. Thus, the data for the FO treatment, for example, represent the mean similarity obtained from four pairwise comparisons (the mean of the day 0 profile compared to the day 6 profile, the day 0 profile compared to the day 13 profile, the day 0 profile compared to the day 20 profile, and the day 0 profile compared to the day 26 profile). 