The grouping of divisions into dendrograms a to f in Fig. 3 is arbitrary due to the undefined division level branching order in the Bacteria (16, 18). Most Wurtsmith sequence types were placed with high bootstrap values into their respective divisions. To compare organisms that occupy different redox zones and to examine experimental reproducibility, four PCR libraries were prepared with universally conserved 16S rDNA primers: WCHA and WsCH with DNA from the methanogenic CH core, WSA with DNA from the methanogenic–sulfate-reducing S core, and WFeA with DNA from the iron- or sulfate-reducing Fe core. All libraries exhibited some sequence types that were numerically dominant (13 to 81% of the clones), as well as numerous sequence types that occurred only once or twice in a particular library. Libraries WCHA and WsCH were prepared from the same bulk DNA extracted from methanogenic soil core CH by independent but identical PCR and cloning steps to test the reproducibility of these steps. The two clone libraries were similar in their composition; most numerically dominant sequence types, such as WCHB1-26, WCHB1-12, and WCHD3-03, were dominant in both libraries (Table 1). The sequence types that differed between the two libraries were the relatively rare ones that, therefore, would have a good probability of not being resampled in these analyses. Library WSA was similar to libraries WCHA and WsCH; only the sequence types with RFLP patterns that appeared more than once in the WSA library were sequenced, and all were identical to numerically dominant sequence types in the WCHA and WsCH libraries. Library WFeA, from the iron- or sulfate-reducing zone, was markedly different from the other three libraries. Only the sequence types with RFLP patterns that appeared more than once in the WFeA library were sequenced; five of the seven types sequenced were not encountered in any of the other libraries. In order to explore further the diversity of the methanogenic zone of the Wurtsmith aquifer and to examine the effects of different primers on the composition of clone libraries, libraries WCHB (bacterial primers) and WCHD (archaeal primers) were created with the same DNA as that used for the WCHA and WsCH libraries. The numerically dominant sequence type in the WCHD library (81% of RFLP patterns examined) was also the numerically dominant archaeal sequence type in the WCHA library (universal primers). The WCHB library, however, differed from the WCHA library; three of the most numerous sequence types in the WCHB library were not observed in the WCHA library (WCHB1-01, WCHB1-06, and WCHB1-15). These sequence types did not occur in the universal libraries because they contained four mismatches from the universal 515F primer (see Discussion). Microbial diversity of the contaminated aquifer.SSU rRNA-based molecular analyses have resulted in the description of over 30 major lineages (divisions) in the bacterial domain (16). The majority (70%) of the analyzed Wurtsmith rDNA sequence types were affiliated with recognized bacterial divisions and archaeal groups. Some main findings include a new subdivision of the Verrucomicrobia division defined exclusively by Wurtsmith sequence types (Fig. 3d) (16); significant phylogenetic expansion of the termite group I candidate division (Fig. 3d) (29); a great diversity of Wurtsmith sequence types in the green nonsulfur bacterium division (Fig. 3f) (16); a terrestrial close relative (WCHA1-38) of the marine crenarchaeote Cenarchaeum symbiosum(95% identity); and the first description of terrestrial representatives of a low-temperature,Thermoplasma-associated clade of Euryarchaeota(Fig. 3g), members of which previously had been detected only in marine environments (26). Approximately 20% of the described Wurtsmith sequence types are affiliated reproducibly with four recently described candidate divisions from a Yellowstone hot spring (OP5, OP8, OP10, and OP11) (18). The association of the Wurtsmith sequence types with the OP candidate divisions expands the known diversity for these divisions and strengthens their division level status. Candidate division OP11 is represented by 13 Wurtsmith sequence types, including one type, WCHB1-26, that is abundant in the universal libraries of the methanogenic zone (ca. 15% of clones analyzed). Similarly, a representative of candidate division OP5, WCHB1-03, appears to be abundant in all redox zones of the contaminated aquifer (Table 1). The apparent abundance and diversity of OP sequence types suggest that organisms represented by these sequence types may play significant but unknown roles in the bioremediation process in the Wurtsmith aquifer, providing an impetus to attempt the cultivation of representatives of the OP11 and OP5 groups for further study. The present study of the Wurtsmith aquifer suggests the existence of six novel candidate divisions (WS1 to WS6; Fig. 