Moreover, several genes encoding new physiological properties of T. sibiricus were identified on the basis of genomic sequence analysis. Open reading frames (ORFs) similar to those identified in Thermococcus kodakaraensis were found and described as pyruvate-formate lyase (PFL) (see Section 7.1). Since T. kodakaraensis has never been reported to grow with alkanes, its PFL enzyme was suggested to play a role in pyruvate metabolism. Due to the lack of more accurate experimental data on this previously unknown physiological feature of T. sibiricus, definitive classification as PFL or alkylsuccinate synthase for the identified homologous genes could not be made due to the large divergence observed within glycyl radical enzymes (GRE) superfamily ( Mardanov et al., 2009 ; Callaghan et al., 2010). This requires further investigation to elucidate the likely role of this probably new enzyme. 5. Methanogenesis Methanogenesis is referred to as the biological formation of methane that is carried out by strictly anaerobic microorganisms. The anaerobic decomposition of complex organic matter to methane requires the concerted effort of metabolically different types of microorganisms. Typically, this mutual dependence is commonly described as syntrophic cooperation based on the transfer of formate, hydrogen and acetate from fermentative organisms to methanogens. The overall biodegradation process becomes thermodynamically favorable only when the methanogenic substrates generated during the ‘cracking’ of complex organic matter are promptly used by methanogens in order to keep their concentrations at a very low level (Schink 1997). The greatest energy conservation with a given alkane substrate is obviously to be expected when nitrate, nitrite, chlorate or ferric iron is used as the final electron acceptor. Methanogenic degradation is the least energetically favorable process when compared to other anaerobic respirations (Table 1). The biodegradation of alkanes under methanogenic conditions was first demonstrated in highly enriched cultures obtained from ditch mud with the ability to convert hexadecane into methane and CO2 (Zengler et al. 1999), so far no isolates had been obtained and only a few studies have provided the phylogeny of microorganisms potentially involved in this syntrophic association (Zengler et al., 1999; Gieg et al., 2008 ; Jones et al., 2008). In the ditch mud methanogenic enrichment degrading hexadecane, it was assumed that the community was essentially composed of: (i) syntrophic proton-reducing acetogenic bacteria (Syntrophus spp.) which decompose the alkane to acetate and H2; (ii) a group of archaea (Methanosaeta) which form methane and CO2 from acetate; and (iii) another group of archaea (Metanospirillum and Methanoculleus) converting CO2 and H2 to methane (Zengler et al. 1999). In this enrichment, it was suggested that more than 2/3 of the methane produced was from acetate. Similarly, in the methanogenic residual oil degrading enrichment culture derived from a gas condensate contaminated subsurface sediments, the archaeal sequences, whose closest matches were almost exclusively cultivated methanogens, were predominantly affiliated with acetoclastic Methanosaeta spp. The eubacterial clone library was more diverse, with the majority of sequences (78.6% clone frequency based on 16S rRNA) related to Firmicutes (6 phylotypes), including some presumptive Gram-positive sulfate-reducing, hydrocarbon-degrading genera related to Pelotomaculum spp. ( Gieg et al., 2008 ; Abu Laban et al., 2009) as well as the syntrophic bacteria Desulfotomaculum cluster I ( Gieg et al. 2008). Among the other constituents of the eubacterial community were members of the δ-Proteobacteria (Desulfobulbus, Desulfovibrio and Smithella), as well as fermentative bacteria affiliated with Chloroflexi, Bacteroidetes and Actinobacteria ( Gieg et al. 2008). Data obtained from the methanogenic enrichment cultures described above suggest that acetoclastic methanogenesis may represent an important biochemical pathway for the formation of methane from crude oil components. This assumption is further supported by thermodynamic calculations indicating that hexadecane conversion to methane is driven primarily through acetoclastic methanogenesis (Dolfing et al. 2008). In contrast, the methanogenic oil alkane-degrading enrichment derived from estuarine sediments was found to be dominated by Syntrophus spp. and CO2-reducing methanogens among several other phylotypes (Jones et al. 