Anaerobic benzene degradation by bacteria Summary Benzene is a widespread and toxic contaminant. The fate of benzene in contaminated aquifers seems to be primarily controlled by the abundance of oxygen: benzene is aerobically degraded at high rates by ubiquitous microorganisms, and the oxygen-dependent pathways for its breakdown were elucidated more than 50 years ago. In contrast, benzene was thought to be persistent under anoxic conditions until 25 years ago. Nevertheless, within the last 15 years, several benzene-degrading cultures have been enriched under varying electron acceptor conditions in laboratories around the world, and organisms involved in anaerobic benzene degradation have been identified, indicating that anaerobic benzene degradation is a relevant environmental process. However, only a few benzene degraders have been isolated in pure culture so far, and they all use nitrate as an electron acceptor. In some highly enriched strictly anaerobic cultures, benzene has been described to be mineralized cooperatively by two or more different organisms. Despite great efforts, the biochemical mechanism by which the aromatic ring of benzene is activated in the absence of oxygen is still not fully elucidated; methylation, hydroxylation and carboxylation are discussed as likely reactions. This review summarizes the current knowledge about the ‘key players’ of anaerobic benzene degradation under different electron acceptor conditions and the possible pathway(s) of anaerobic benzene degradation. Introduction Benzene is a common component of fuels, particularly gasoline, and an important raw chemical used as solvent or chemical intermediate. Due to its extensive use, benzene is a widespread anthropogenic contaminant in aqueous environments. Compared with other hydrocarbons, benzene is highly water-soluble (saturation: 24 mM at 25°C) and toxic; the US Environmental Protection Agency has classified benzene as a Group A human carcinogen. Chemically, benzene is stable under typical environmental conditions, as the compound is stabilized by the aromatic ring system (π-electron system) without any potentially reactive substituent. The persistence of benzene in aqueous environments seems to be primarily controlled by the abundance of oxygen as benzene is often persistent under anoxic conditions. Aerobic benzene-degrading microorganisms are ubiquitous and have been known for a long time – the first report in regard to aerobic benzene-degrading microorganisms dates almost 100 years back (Söhngen, 1913). Benzene-degrading organisms contain mono- or dioxygenases which activate the aromatic nucleus by introducing molecular oxygen to yield phenol or cis-benzene dihydrodiol, compounds that are further oxidized to catechol (Gibson and Parales, 2000; Tao et al., 2004). The aromatic ring of catechol is finally cleaved by further dioxygenases in ortho- or meta-position (Vaillancourt et al., 2006). Contaminant plumes in aquifers usually become anoxic due to the low solubility and rapid microbial consumption of oxygen. Therefore, knowledge about anaerobic benzene degradation is highly relevant to understand the fate of benzene in the environment. Until the beginning of 1980, aromatic hydrocarbons were thought to be generally recalcitrant under anoxic conditions (Atlas, 1981). In the last 25 years, it was realized that many hydrocarbons including aromatics are biodegradable under several electron-accepting conditions (for a review see Foght, 2008). However, anaerobic benzene degradation is usually slow and associated with long lag-times. Benzene is considered to be more persistent under anoxic conditions than its alkylated derivatives toluene, ethylbenzene and xylene isomers and the reasons for the recalcitrance of benzene are not yet clear. Co-contaminants have been shown to inhibit anaerobic benzene degradation (Edwards et al., 1992; Cunningham et al., 2001; Ruiz-Aguilar et al., 2003; Da Silva and Alvarez, 2007) – and other studies suggest that anaerobic benzene degraders are not ubiquitous in subsurface sediments (Kazumi et al., 1997; Nales et al., 1998; Weiner and Lovley, 1998a; Phelps and Young, 1999). As we outline in this review, benzene can be degraded by syntrophic consortia which may require narrow and specific environmental conditions for optimal functioning, possibly explaining why benzene is not or only slowly degraded at some field sites or in laboratory enrichment cultures. The number of laboratory enrichment cultures capable to degrade benzene under anoxic conditions has increased in the last 10 years, but is still low compared with the number of cultures described for anoxic degradation of other hydrocarbons, e.g. toluene. Notably, only four benzene-degrading pure cultures were described, and all of them use nitrate as electron acceptor (Coates et al., 2001; Kasai et al., 2006). Under strictly anoxic conditions, pure benzene-degrading strains have been not yet isolated, although some enrichment cultures seem to be dominated by specific organisms. The lack of capable laboratory cultures and the slow growth of the available cultures might be the main reasons why the pathway for anaerobic benzene degradation is still not elucidated. 