A5 Who eats what, where and when? Isotope-labelling experiments are coming of age Abstract Isotope-labelling experiments have changed the way microbial ecologists investigate the ecophysiology of microbial populations and cells in the environment. Insight into the 'uncultivated majority' accompanies methodology that involves the incorporation of stable isotopes or radioisotopes into sub-populations of environmental samples. Subsequent analysis of labelled biomarkers of sub-populations with stable-isotope probing (DNA-SIP, RNA-SIP, phospholipid-derived fatty acid-SIP) or individual cells with a combination of fluorescence in situ hybridization and microautoradiography reveals linked phylogenetic and functional information about the organisms that assimilated these compounds. Here, we review some of the most recent literature, with an emphasis on methodological improvements to the sensitivity and utility of these methods. We also highlight related isotope techniques that are in continued development and hold promise to transform the way we link phylogeny and function in complex microbial communities. Top of page Introduction The environment fosters an intricate combination of organisms, nutrients and physical matrices, harbouring almost immeasurable niche diversity. Within this context, microorganisms inhabit every conceivable location on earth, gaining energy by coupling most energetically favourable electron donors and receptors (Schmidt, 2006). Linking the identification of uncultured microorganisms with their potential to metabolize compounds in the environment represents the Holy Grail of scientific discovery for microbial ecologists. The advent of stable- and radioactive-isotope-based techniques was welcomed for the link it provided between the phylogeny and function of uncultivated microbes. Stable-isotope probing (SIP) for use in microbial ecology was based on the premise that a physiologically active subset of organisms within environmental samples, when offered substrates labelled with a stable isotope, would incorporate the heavier C- or N-source into cell components. The first demonstrations of stable-isotope labelled phospholipid-derived fatty acids (PLFA; Boschker et al, 1998), DNA (Radajewski et al, 2000) and RNA (Manefield et al, 2002) established the method for clear identification of specific sub-populations of microorganisms that metabolized specific compounds. The parallel development of the fluorescence in situ hybridization and microautoradiography (FISH-MAR) technique (Lee et al, 1999) offered microbial ecologists the ability to directly observe the incorporation of substrates labelled with a radioactive isotope into single microbial cells. Over the past few years, dedicated research in many laboratories has refined earlier SIP and FISH-MAR methodology by reducing bias, increasing sensitivity and expanding the applications of isotope studies (multiple environments, substrates and target organisms). Related techniques are rapidly being developed and gaining in applicability. For example, isotope arrays, Raman microscopy and nanoSIMS are all expanding our suite of isotope-based techniques. Here, we highlight recent and notable achievements, including up-and-coming developments that are set to transform the way we study the phylogeny and function of microbes in the biosphere. Top of page Stable-isotope probing SIP experiments are dependent upon the availability of suitable stable isotopes of atoms (for example, 13C, 15N, 18O), and access to target compounds which are fully, or significantly, substituted with the stable isotope of choice. The earliest PLFA-SIP and DNA-SIP studies focused on one-carbon (C1) metabolism in sediments and soils (Boschker et al, 1998; Radajewski et al, 2000), but SIP studies have now diversified to include a wide range of substrates and environments (reviewed by Dumont and Murrell, 2005; Evershed et al, 2006; Friedrich, 2006; Madsen, 2006; Whiteley et al, 2006). In fact, a sampling of the most recent literature highlights the diverse extent to which substrates and environments are being coupled. Examples include 13C-labelled acetate in Israel's Lake Kinneret (Schwarz et al, 2007) and in the Florida Everglades (Chauhan and Ogram, 2006), cellulose in an agricultural soil (el Zahar Haichar et al, 2007), benzene in contaminated groundwater (Kasai et al, 2006), organic substrates in marine sediments (Webster et al, 2006), atmospheric methane in an upland soil (Maxfield et al, 2006), 2,4-dichlorophenoxyacetic acid in a field soil (Cupples and Sims, 2007), pyrene in a soil bioreactor (Singleton et al, 2006), bicarbonate in an estuarine sediment (Freitag et al, 2006), propionate in a wastewater bioreactor (Meyer et al, 2006), acetate/methanol in activated sludge (Osaka et al, 2006) and wheat residue in soil (Bernard et al, 2007). For most of these studies, >99% fully 13C-labelled substrates were purchased from commercial suppliers. However, limited commercial availability of 13C- or 15N-labelled molecules suitable as microbial growth substrates constrains the design of isotope experiments. As a result, several research groups have pioneered in-house chemical and biological synthesis for the preparation of their desired substrates. Singleton et al (2005, 2006) employed chemical synthesis of commercially unavailable 13C-labelled salicylate, naphthalene, phenanthrene and pyrene from the 'building blocks' of purchased 13C-phenol, succinic acid and phenol. In a recent study of soil cellulolytic bacteria, the 13C-labelled cellulose was purified from the growth medium of Acetobacter xylinus, which was grown on 13C-glucose as a sole source of carbon (el Zahar Haichar et al, 2007). Finally, 13CO2-labelling of plants represents a clever approach to tracking plant-derived carbon to microorganisms in the rhizosphere (Cadisch et al, 2005; Lu and Conrad, 2005; Rangel-Castro et al, 2005). Such creative chemical and biological synthesis of complex organic compounds widens the application and versatility of SIP. One of the challenges of SIP experiments is employing substrate concentrations and incubation times that mirror the in situ conditions found in the natural environment. 