1983), especially in soils and sediments, which are difficult environments to analyse definitively by molecular techniques. Phospholipid fatty acids (PLFA) were analysed in three cores from within and along the contamination plume (near MP11, MP3, and MP8; see Figure 2) and one core from outside the plume (near MP9; see Figure 2) (Franzmann et al. 1996). The PLFA were extracted from core material collected from depths of about 30 cm above the water table, at the water table, and from a depth within the contamination plume. Particulates were collected on large in-line filters (0.22 µm) from groundwater within the contamination plume from similar depth multiports adjacent to the sites of core collection. A summary of outcomes of the analyses is given in Table 3. Of the groundwater samples taken, the sample that contained the lowest viable biomass was in the plume at MP11. This sample was from the site that contained the greatest amount of aromatic hydrocarbons (136 mg l−1; Davis et al. 1999), whereas the greatest biomass in the groundwater occurred at MP3 where the water contains considerably less aromatic hydrocarbons (48 mg l−1; Davis et al. 1999). Long et al. (1995) noted a drop-off in microbial biomass in subsurface samples that were exposed to high concentration. Sample taken at the depth of the groundwater. centrations of petroleum hydrocarbons, which they defined as samples that contained “free product or non-aqueous phase liquid and contaminants dissolved in the groundwater in parts per million”. According to Davis et al. (1999), the concentrations of benzene and toluene at MP11 were often comparable to concentrations in equilibrium with gasoline NAPL. The percentage of biomass attached to the aquifer substrate, as opposed to in the groundwater, can be calculated from the data in Table 4. In the vicinity of multiports MP9, MP11, MP3 and MP8, the percentage of biomass that was attached to the substrate was 98%, 99%, 96% and 98%, respectively. The percentage attached was always high, but greatest in cores taken from the region of highest contaminant concentration, MP11. It is generally considered that microorganisms in biofilms tolerate higher concentrations of toxic contaminants than “free living” microbial cells (Foley & Gilbert 1996). Two phospholipid-derived fatty acids have been commonly used as signature fatty acids for the presence of sulfate-reducing bacteria. The fatty acids i17:1c9 and 10-methyl-16:0 are supposedly indicative of Desulfovibrio spp. and Desulfobacter spp., respectively. Neither signature was found in the PLFAs in core material collected from below the groundwater table in the zone of sulfate depletion (Franzmann et al. 1996). The fatty acid 10-methyl-16:0 was found in soil cores from outside the contaminant plume, either above or at the aquifer water table. A range of monomethylated fatty acids may be derived from actinomycetes that occur in aerobic soils (Zelles et al. 1995). Enrichment and isolation of sulfate-reducing bacteria Neither the initial FISH probing nor the analysis of phospholipid fatty acids of material from the contaminated site, provided evidence of populations of sulfate-reducing bacteria. 