In situ bioremediation of oily sludge-contaminated soil by biostimulation of indigenous microbes through adding manure was conducted at the Shengli oilfield in northern China. A After bioremediation for 360 days, total petroleum hydrocarbon (TPH) content was reduced by 58.2% in the treated plots compared with only 15.6% in the control plot. A Moreover, bioremediation significantly improved the physicochemical properties of the soil in the treated plot. A Soil microbial counts and community-level physiological profiling were also examined. A Manure addition increased TPH degraders and polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon (PAH) degraders in the contaminated soil by one to two orders of magnitude. A The activity and biodiversity of soil microbial communities also increased markedly in the treated plot compared with that of the control. A Finally, biotoxicity was used to evaluate the soils and a sharp increase in the EC50 of the soil after bioremediation was observed, indicating that bioremediation had reduced the toxicity of the soil. A Bioremediation Biostimulation In situ Microbial community Oily sludge Environmental contamination by petroleum and its derivatives is a serious problem worldwide. A Considerable amounts of hydrocarbons have been released into water and soil as a result of pipeline leaks, transport accidents, and storage tank ruptures. A Apart from incidental contamination of the ecosystem, vast amounts of oily sludge generated in water–oil separation systems at oilfields and accumulation of waste oily materials in crude-oil storage tanks also causes problems to the environment (Mrayyan and Battikhi 2005). Many components of oily sludge are toxic, mutagenic, and carcinogenic. A They are therefore classified as priority environmental pollutants by the US Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA 1986) and are also on the list of dangerous solid wastes in China. A Improper disposal of oily sludge may contaminate soil and pose a serious threat to groundwater. Petroleum-contaminated soil is currently treated using three methods: physical, chemical, and biological. A Physical or chemical methods include incineration, chlorination, ozonation, and combustion (Ting et al. A 1999). Many of these technologies, however, are either costly or do not completely remove contaminants. A On the other hand, biological treatment (bioremediation) appears to be among the most promising methods for dealing with a wide range of organic contaminants, particularly petroleum hydrocarbons. A The technology is also environmentally sound since it simulates natural processes and can result in the complete destruction of hazardous compounds into innocuous products (Balba et al. A 1998). For this reason, a number of studies on bioremediation of petroleum-contaminated soils have been carried out (Venosa et al. A 1997; Jorgensen et al. A 2000; Ding et al. A 2002; Sabat’e et al. A 2004). There are numerous studies on the bioremediation of petroleum-contaminated soil, but there are few (Mishra et al. A 2001; Mrayyan and Battikhi 2005) studies on bioremediation of oily sludge-contaminated soil. A One explanation for this may be that most of the work is performed by companies, who do not publish their results for proprietary reasons. Shengli oilfield (located at 36°55′–38°10′N 118°07′–119°10′E) is the second largest oilfield in China and thousands of tonnes of oily sludge are generated and piled up on the ground every year. 