Indeed, a number of catabolic groups included individual isolates that degraded nearly all of the 15 test hydrocarbons, but these bacteria represented a small minority. It is interesting to speculate on the purpose of maintaining multiple degradative pathways for compounds that have little resemblance to one another (e.g., an alkane and an aromatic). It is not known whether these catabolic pathways are simultaneously expressed and active in the environment or whether certain pathways are repressed while others remain functional. Additional biochemical and physiological studies will be needed to resolve these questions. Frequencies of test hydrocarbon utilization by the Seal Beach isolates differed somewhat from those of 32 gasolinedegrading isolates analyzed by Jamison and co-workers (16, 17). For example, 2,2,4-trimethylpentane was the most frequently biodegraded test hydrocarbon in the Jamison study (frequency of degradation, 60%), whereas this same substrate was utilized by about 7% of the 297 Seal Beach isolates examined. In addition, while p-xylene was infrequently utilized by the Jamison isolates (<15%), it was the second-most-utilized compound among the Seal Beach bacteria. Toluene and ethylbenzene were among the most frequently utilized hydrocarbons in both investigations. Bacteria able to catabolize o-xylene, methylcyclopentane, and cyclohexane were not isolated by Jamison, though each of these hydrocarbons was biodegraded by a consortium growing on gasoline, suggesting cooxidative or syntrophic processes. It is possible that bacteria existed at the Jamison site that could directly degrade these hydrocarbons, but they were not detected because of the low number of isolates screened. In the Jamison investigation, isolates were obtained from groundwater following in situ injection of nutrients and oxygen. Thus, growth of aerobic gasoline-degrading bacteria may have been enhanced relative to the Seal Beach aquifer, which is anoxic and largely depleted of inorganic nutrients (e.g., nitrogen and phosphorus [unpublished data]). In situ bioremediation via nutrient injection and recycling establishes subsurface conditions which favor development of certain hydrocarbon-degrading phenotypes while suppressing the growth of others. Quantitative data are needed to better understand and delineate the relationship between microbial community structure and perturbation of in situ conditions by invasive bioremediative techniques. 