The other reports also involved highly polluted source material (Edwards & Grbic-Galic, 1992; Lovley et al. 1995) including an area exposed to hydrothermally produced hydrocarbons over a geological time scale (Phelps et al. 1996). Other researchers have noted a lack of degradation in similar sediments under the same conditions (Ball & Reinhard, 1996; Beller et al. 1992; Edwards et al. 1992; Rabus et al. 1996; Reinhard et al. 1997). The lack of degradation is sometimes ascribed to the preferential utilization of other carbon compounds (Edwards & Grbic-Galic, 1992), an observation which is consistent with, but not proven by the observation that benzene was the last compound to be degraded in our experiments (see Figure 1B). Complete inhibition of benzene utilization did not, however, occur in our enrichments as it may have in other reports. It appears that the ability to anaerobically degrade benzene is not widespread throughout the environment, but can only be found in certain sites with the right combination of pollution history and environment. The mineralization of benzene under iron-reducing (Kazumi et al. 1997; Lovley et al. 1994; Lovley et al. 1996) and methanogenic (Grbic-Galic & Vogel, 1987; Kazumi et al. 1997; Wilson et al. 1986) conditions has also been reported, but was not observed in this study. The concentrations of benzene used in our enrichments was much higher than in the previous iron-reducing reports, and the lag times in the methanogenic experiments was often longer than the length of our experiment, this may explain our lack of success. The relationship between the amount of electron acceptor lost and the amount of BTEX degraded during the course of the experiment (Table 3) supports the hypothesis that these aromatic compounds are being mineralized to carbon dioxide and water. The agreement between expected and predicted values was best in the AK-site water enrichment (107%), where the largest amount of BTEX (0.425 mM) was lost in a relatively short time (∼100 days). Ball & Reinhard (1996) observed an excess of from 2.4–6.6 times the amount of electron acceptor usage over what would be required to mineralize the added BTEX in their microcosms. This effect was accounted for in our study by subtracting out the amount of nitrate and sulfate reduced in un-fed controls. The values that we obtained in these background controls (2.0–8.4 times) is in good agreement with that they reported. The amount of background utilization was especially high in the denitrifying cultures, and this made it difficult to obtain good estimates of the actual stoichiometry. Degradation of BTEX was much slower and incomplete in cultures amended with gasoline than when BTEX alone was added. Other researchers have noticed similar results when feeding gasoline (Barbaro et al. 1992; Hutchins et al. 1991b). There are many possible explanations for this effect. 