Contamination Standard and ethanol-blended gasoline, obtained from CENPES, Petrobrás, as well as controlled BTEX and BTEX–ethanol mixtures were applied on the surface of the undisturbed soil used in the assays (Österreicher et al., 2004, 2007). BTEX and BTEX–ethanol mixtures (Table 1) were composed according to average amounts found in Brazilian gasoline (Cruz, 2002). 2.1.3. Monitoring 2.1.3.1. Chemical Contaminants were extracted from composite soil samples by orbital shaking in methanol. Gasoline compounds and BTEX contents in soil were determined by gas chromatography using a Shimadzu chromatograph equipped with a flame ionisation detector and an AT-Wax capillary column. Microbial parameters were evaluated prior to and after contamination. Microbial degrading activities were determined measuring fluorescein diacetate (FDA) hydrolysis, following the modified methodology described by Adam and Duncan (2001): composite soil samples were incubated with FDA and fluorescein formed by microbial hydrolytic activity was measured by spectrophotometry at 490 nm (Genesis 2 spectrophotometer, Spectronic Instruments). Bacterial culturable heterotrophic populations were determined in composite soil samples after serial dilution in sterile distilled water; total culturable heterotrophic bacterial populations were enumerated by counting of colony forming units (CFU) in tryptone soy agar (TSA) (Oxoid) 1:10, by pour-plating (Alef, 1995). Soil weight was monitored in one 20-day assay to evaluate gain and loss of water in uncontaminated soils, as well as loss of contaminants by volatilisation in contaminated sterile dried soils. Statistical analyses of variance were performed using OpenStat®. ANOVA and Student's t test were applied in order to evaluate differences in data at 95% significance level. This study evaluated the losses of water and of gasoline, standard and ethanol-amended, by volatilisation, from undisturbed soil columns, evaluating the effect of soil water content on the retention of gasoline compounds. Undisturbed soil columns were collected in aluminium tubes (35 cm high, 12 cm ), then used in three different water contents: natural gravimetric water content, varying from 8.40 to 9.61%, oven dried (105 °C, for at least 24 h, until constant weight was attained) and at water holding capacity. Soil columns were contaminated with ethanol-blended gasoline (1:4) then left at room temperature (around 25 °C) for 35 days while gravimetrically monitored; weight shifts showed volatilisation of contaminants and water. Other undisturbed soil columns (17 cm high, 12 cm ), at field natural water content, were contaminated with standard and ethanol-blended gasoline. The same gravimetric monitoring was performed for 7 days so as to compare gasoline and gasoline–ethanol mixture initial volatilisation. The objective of these experiments was to study in a semi-quantitative manner the distribution of gasoline in the vadose zone; contaminants’ mobility and infiltration in unsaturated artificial soil were evaluated comparing the behaviours of gasoline and ethanol-amended gasoline. Contaminants were introduced in a two-dimensional (2D) glass tank and distribution images compared. Effluents were collected after drainage through the porous medium for qualitative and quantitative analyses that aimed to determine benzene and toluene retention in the soil matrix as well as the influence ethanol may have on those processes. A glass microcosm allowed for visualisation of spills and image capture; it was composed of a glass tank 30 × 30 × 50 cm provided with a sampling port located at the bottom of the PVC frame, for the collection of effluents (Fig. 1). The tank was packed with quartz sand particles and was maintained with residual water saturation, simulating the soil vadose zone in field capacity condition. The porous medium was carefully introduced into the microcosm using a funnel and rubber hose so that the particle distribution would be as uniform as possible. Water was also introduced carefully at the surface and drained at the bottom of the container. Quartz sand (Potters) comprised the granular, homogenous medium used to fill the glass tank. The crushed quartz particles had sizes between 0.43 and 0.25 mm thus being classified as fine sand. A single pulse of contamination (standard and 20% ethanol-amended gasoline) was applied with a funnel inserted into the surface of porous medium in the glass tank (Fig. 1). 