As no detectable expulsion of water seems to happen while amended gasoline percolates through natural soil, conditions in this case are more favourable to microbial degrading activities. Furthermore, ethanol probably remains retained in greater amounts in residual water in natural than in inert porous medium, which also stimulates microbial activity (Österreicher-Cunha et al., 2007) and probably biomass increase (da Silva and Alvarez, 2002). When contaminants enter the soil, the structure of microbial communities shifts, as the strains that are able to survive and eventually use the xenobiotic molecules as carbon and energy source are selected (e.g. Daubaras and Chakraborty, 1992; Edwards, 2002; Thompson et al., 1999 ;  Zucchi et al., 2003). Thus, as the structure of the community changes, extremely specialised microorganisms thrive and spread whereas others, less specialised, either disappear or enter resistant forms, like cysts and spores. These highly adapted strains are less likely to grow under laboratory conditions, explaining the drastic reduction observed in culturable bacterial populations after soil contamination. As biodegradation continues, soil toxicity gradually decreases until eventually attaining levels that allow for less specialised strains to resume growing, while the highly adapted populations in turn fade away (Duarte et al., 2001; Pascual et al., 2000 ;  Zucchi et al., 2003). Results show that the resumption of growth of culturable bacteria took place around the 40th day after contamination, whereas in ethanol-contaminated soils a 30-day delay was seen for this recovery. Hence, monitoring culturable bacteria allows the evaluation of levels of soil toxicity. While culturable bacteria disappear, non-culturable microorganisms in soil seem to be actively degrading BTEX and ethanol, as degrading activity increased in contaminated soils. Those with ethanol-amended gasoline display much higher and longer-lasting activity, probably because of a preliminary degradation of ethanol followed by that of BTEX. Gasoline compounds have a natural origin and most environmental organisms possess the ability to degrade them (Atlas, 1981; Atlas, 1995; Baker et al., 2000 ;  Miles and Doucette, 2001); however, this process requires the activation or synthesis of specific enzymes, which generally causes a lag time before degradation begins. Ethanol, on the other hand, is constitutively degraded, meaning the enzymes are constantly active and ethanol immediately enters metabolic biochemical cycles (Stryer, 1995). No lag phase was observed before the onset of increased levels of microbial activity, as seen by Dakhel et al. (2003). The amounts of ethanol blended to gasoline did not seem sufficient to hinder microbial activity, although it inhibited the growth of culturable bacteria. The presence of significant amounts of biodegradable organic molecules in gasoline could have counteracted the toxic effect of ethanol by stimulating other, resistant, populations. Degrading activity remained constant in uncontaminated soils throughout the 33-day assay while contaminated soils showed increased activity, higher in ethanol -containing soils. Thus, a delay of processes in soils contaminated with amended gasoline is also substantiated by measurements of microbial activity, suggesting a preferential degradation of ethanol that slows down BTEX degradation. Statistical testing of activity levels shows a significant difference between responses from standard and from ethanol-blended gasoline as well as between contaminated and uncontaminated soils (p < 0.05). Only sterile soils still had detectable amounts of BTEX 33 days after contamination, substantiating the role of microbial degrading activity in the disappearance of contaminants. A delayed biodegradation of BTEX when gasoline is blended with ethanol could be caused by a depletion of soil electron acceptors due to the early preferential degradation of ethanol. BTEX would then have to be degraded in anaerobic conditions, which is slower and less effective as observed in saturated soil, in field as well as in laboratory experiments (Heider and Fuchs, 1997 ;  Lovley, 2000). However, this negative effect of ethanol on BTEX biodegradation seems to be easily by-passed by the addition of new or other electron acceptors, like oxygen, by aeration (bioventing or air-sparging), iron or sulphates (da Silva and Alvarez, 2005; Österreicher-Cunha et al., 2004 ;  Österreicher-Cunha et al., 2007). Thus, the benefits of ethanol-amended gasoline regarding the control and reduction of atmospheric pollution are not threatened by problems linked to its biodegradation in soil; simple and accessible measures can be taken to avoid a longer persistence of gasoline–ethanol mixtures in the subsurface. Moreover, the increase of biomass caused by ethanol degradation in the saturated zone seems to lead to a more efficient subsequent degradation of BTEX (da Silva and Alvarez, 2002). However, a better understanding of these processes is still necessary and crucial to the decision-making involved in the remediation approaches to be adopted in cases of soil contamination with ethanol-amended gasoline. 5. Conclusions This study assessed some of the processes that regulate the biodegradation and distribution of gasoline and ethanol-blended gasoline in unsaturated soil, analysing physical, chemical and microbiological parameters. 