Kuujjuaq experiences above freezing temperatures at least 4 months of the year, whereas Alert is characterized by extremely cold temperatures with only 6–8 weeks per year at, or above, the freezing point. Sequencing of selected bands isolated from the DGGE gels revealed a broad spectrum of microorganisms. The majority of sequences (greater than 63%) represented high G+C Gram-positive organisms from the Actinomycetales. Many organisms able to degrade petroleum hydrocarbons are found in this group, including Rhodococcus, Corynebacterium, and Nocardia[44–46]. The examination of Siberian soils, using culturing [47] and molecular methods [48], identified the prevalence of the same groups of microorganisms, although some significant differences were noted. Many members of the low G+C Gram-positives were identified using culturing methods [47], whereas in this study, none of the sequenced bands showed similarity to members of the low G+C Gram-positive microorganisms. The percentages of isolated Gram-positive and Gram-negative culturable organisms isolated were 65.5% and 35.5%, respectively [47], which were almost identical to the values observed in this study, despite the difference in approaches, i.e. culture-dependent vs. -independent methods. In the study using molecular methods [48], Proteobacteria made up 60.5% of all sequenced clones, while Gram-positive microorganisms were less than 12%. None of the samples used in the Siberian studies were contaminated, suggesting that these surveys may represent typical bacterial populations found in tundra environments. Comparison of the sequences obtained from bands K11 and A11 revealed 89% and 86% similarity, respectively, to reference sequences making it difficult to determine more than a general phylogenetic relationship. Sequence K11 consistently grouped with the δ Proteobacteria whereas sequence A11 grouped with the β Proteobacteria. Despite these consistent groupings, both of these sequences most likely represent two novel organisms within the class Proteobacteria. Metabolic diversity of the cold-adapted microbial communities was estimated using Biolog GN plates incubated at 10°C. Clustering of the samples into four groups, based on the total number of substrates oxidized, suggested that the TPH levels were not consequential in influencing the overall metabolic diversity. All of these clusters possessed both uncontaminated and contaminated samples. None of the other measured physico-chemical parameters (see Table 1) provided an explanation for these divisions, suggesting that other environmental factors were important in influencing the metabolic diversity of the microbial communities. Cluster analysis, using the rates of oxidation for each substrate, suggested some unique relationships between the samples and the rates at which substrates were oxidized. Three of the four clusters on the dendrogram followed the trends observed in the total number of substrates oxidized. The three clusters included samples A2 and A3, K2 and K4, and K1 and K3. These groupings were not completely unexpected as cluster analysis of the rates of oxidation is also influenced by the total number of substrates oxidized. The most interesting cluster was the fourth one composed of samples A1 and Ac. These samples were grouped together based on rates of oxidation, yet the total number of substrates oxidized by each of the samples was significantly different (61 and 26 for Ac and A1, respectively). All of the clusters observed were also independent of the level of TPH contamination and were primarily based on the geographic origin of the samples, i.e. Alert samples grouped separately from the Kuujjuaq samples. A1 was the only sample to demonstrate a significant inhibition of metabolic activity, probably due to the level of TPH contamination. TPH contamination above 25 000 ppm has been shown to be inhibitory to soil microbial populations [49,50]. In addition, it was observed that despite several different treatment protocols, the rates and levels of hexadecane mineralization in soil A1 were markedly decreased compared with the moderately contaminated soil A3 [6]. In conclusion, the combination of culture-dependent and -independent methods to characterize the cold-adapted soil microbial population of two northern Canadian communities impacted by petroleum hydrocarbons suggests that the influence of contamination is only one of several factors that determine the selective pressures on indigenous microbial communities. 