Total petroleum hydrocarbon and polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon biodegradation.The contaminated soil had a high initial TPH concentration (around 8,000 mg kg [dry weight] of soil−1) (Table 2). When aromatic compounds were examined, no phenol derivatives, naphthalene, or alkyl derivatives of naphthalene were detected (the detection limit was more than 0.5 μg g [dry weight] of soil−1). Consequently, we presumed that a limited amount of PAHs and TPH was lost by evaporation and/or biodegradation prior to soil sampling. PAHs withthree and four rings were the most abundant components, and their concentrations were between 100 and 700 mg kg−1. The polyaromatic fraction accounted for 90% of the TPH fraction (as determined by gravimetric measurement), while the TPH accounted for 85% of the total organic extract. View this table: In this window In a new window TABLE 2. Concentrations and removal of TPH and target PAHs in bioremediation treatments The TPH concentration did not decrease significantly (P > 0.05) in the untreated soil (treatment 1M) over the course of the 200-day experiment, whereas there was a slight decrease in autoclaved soil (treatment 3M). The same behavior was observed for the target PAHs. Hence, untreated dry soil (treatment 1M) was used as a control with which to calculate hydrocarbon biodegradation for the different treatments and to compare changes in microbial diversity. By the end of the experiment (200 days), significant TPH biodegradation was observed for all treatments (treatments 2M and 4M to 7M) (Table 2). Biostimulation without nutrient addition (treatment 2M) resulted in slightly greater TPH depletion (P < 0.05) than the treatments in which nutrients were added (treatments 4M to 7M). To study the rates of biodegradation of TPH and target PAHs, biphasic TPH degradation kinetics were assessed because a single first-order decay curve fitted to the entire data set did not adequately explain (r2 < 0.8) the changes in TPH concentration observed during the course of the experiment. Thus, two degradation rates (k1 and k2) were defined according to the breakpoints that best fit the data for all treatments; k1 was used for the early-stage group (from 0 to 45 days of incubation), and k2 was used for the late-stage group (from 90 to 200 days of incubation) (Table 3). It is important to note that k2 was 1 order of magnitude lower than k1 for all treatments, with values near zero for treatments with nutrients. During the first 45 days, the first-order TPH degradation rate constant (k1) was slightly lower for the treatment without nutrients (treatment 2M) than for the other treatments. In contrast, the rate constant (k2) for the late stage (90 to 200 days) was higher (P < 0.05). These rate constants are similar to those reported in other studies of bioremediation in hydrocarbon-contaminated soils (18, 35). View this table: In this window In a new window TABLE 3. First-order biodegradation rates of TPH and target PAHs during the bioremediation experiment Two- and three-ring PAHs were highly degraded (80 to 100%) during the first 45 days, and the biodegradation rate (k) was the same for all treatments (P > 0.05) (Tables 2 and 3). An exception was 1-methyl-anthracene, for which the biodegradation rate was higher (P < 0.05) in treatments without nutrient amendment. Interestingly, phenanthrene and anthracene were not completely degraded (Table 2). One possible explanation for this could be the low bioavailability of the residual quantities of these compounds present after day 45 (31). The biodegradation kinetics of fluoranthene were not affected by nutrient addition (Table 3), whereas the early-stage biodegradation kinetics (k1) of pyrene were slower in the absence of nutrient addition (P < 0.05). The degree of benzo(a)anthracene and chrysene degradation was significantly different when biostimulation without addition of nutrients (treatment 2M) was compared with treatments in which nutrients were added (treatments 4M to 7M). Both compounds were degraded more (P < 0.05) under biostimulation conditions without nutrient addition than in treatments with nutrient addition (Table 2). Furthermore, the late-stage biodegradation rates were significantly higher (P < 0.05) without nutrient addition [10-fold higher for benzo(a)anthracene biodegradation and threefold higher for chrysene biodegradation] (Table 3). Benzo(a)pyrene and benzo(b+k)fluoranthene were not significantly degraded (P > 0.05). The percentages of PAH biodegradation and the kinetics are similar to those reported in other studies (7, 12). Monitoring of the heterotrophic and polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon-degrading microbial populations.As shown in Fig. 