The pristane to phytane ratio of the crude oil was approximately 1.0, indicating minimal weathering of the oil [33], [34]. In contrast, the concentrations of n-alkanes in tar balls and sediments in July Marsh samples demonstrated a highly weathered signature with a pristane to phytane ratio of 0.21 (Figure 3b). Short-chain alkanes were undetected in tar balls and long-chain alkane concentrations steadily increased between C17 and C30. Bacterial Community Structure Within salt marsh sediments, PhyloChip microarray-based analysis identified 12,018 distinct bacterial operational taxonomic units (OTUs) representing 77 phyla using the criteria in Hazen et al. (2010) (Data S1). The number of OTUs in the most abundant phyla is listed in Table 3 (see Table S1 for the complete list of detected phyla). Distinctive trends in the distribution of OTUs were observed during the 3-month time periods. The total number of OTUs in Inlet samples increased between June, July, and September, whereas the total number of OTUs in Marsh samples increased between June and July, but decreased in September. This same trend was observed within many of the individual phyla where Firmicutes and Tenericutes demonstrated the highest fold changes between June and September in Inlet samples increasing by approximately 8.5-fold in surficial samples (0–2 cm) and 3–3.5-fold in subsurface (8–10 cm) samples. The majority of dominant phyla in Marsh samples increased in number of OTUs in July but then decreased in September. Bacteroidetes increased by 5-fold between June and July but subsequently decreased by 9-fold in September. Other phyla, such as Proteobacteria and Tenericutes increased by 5- and 7-fold, respectively, in July, and decreased only by 3.6- and 1.2-fold in September. In contrast, Firmicutes did not display a decrease between July and September, but continued to increase in Marsh 0–2 cm sediments by 13-fold between June and September. Surficial sediments tended to have a higher number of OTUs than subsurface and Inlet and Marsh samples had comparable distribution of OTUs within the phyla. Family-level identification of previously described hydrocarbon-degrading bacteria [35] (7082 OTUs) and their individual relative abundances (based on mean fluorescence intensities) in Inlet and Marsh sediments are summarized in Tables 4 and 5. Similar trends were observed in the relative abundance of bacteria between June and September as was seen with the relative richness (as determined by number of OTUs). Relative abundance tended to increase between June, July, and September in Inlet samples, however Marsh samples demonstrated an increase in July and a subsequent decrease in September. Exceptions to these trends included members of Firmicutes that increased in both Inlet and Marsh throughout the time period and Actinobacteria that decreased in September Inlet samples. Non-metric multi-dimensional scaling (nMDS) analysis of the bacterial community based on the mean relative abundance of identified taxa (Figure 4) revealed three different groupings mainly associated by month: Group I (Inlet 0–2 cm June, Inlet 8–10 cm June, and Marsh 0–2 cm June), Group II (Marsh 8–10 cm June, Inlet 0–2 cm July, Inlet 8–10 cm July, Marsh 0–2 cm July, Marsh 8–10 cm July, and Inlet 0–2 cm September), and Group III (Inlet 8–10 cm September, Marsh 0–2 cm September, and Marsh 8–10 September). Analysis of similarities (ANOSIM) denoted significant (R = 1.0; p = 0.01) differences between the three groups. The overall relative bacterial abundances of these groups (Figure 5) indicated the taxa responsible for these significant differences. Firmicutes increased between Group I and Group III, with members of the classes Bacilli and Clostridia increasing in relative abundance by over 2-fold. Tenericutes and Betaproteobacteria additionally increased in relative abundance by ∼1.5-fold each. Phyla that decreased in relative abundance from Group I to Group III were Verrucomicrobia (2.3-fold), Bacteroidetes (2.3-fold), Cyanobacteria (1.8-fold), Planctomycetes (1.8-fold), Gammaproteobacteria (1.3-fold), and Acidobacteria (1.4-fold). Functional Gene Analysis GeoChip microarray-based analysis identified 16,383 unique functional genes in 13 gene categories within salt marsh sediments (Data S2). Overall Inlet functional gene signal intensities showed moderate differences (R = 0.268; p<0.01) from functional genes detected in Marsh sediments between June and July 2010. The normalized signal intensity representing the relative abundance of all genes within specific categories in Inlet and Marsh samples were compared between June and July (Figure 6). Inlet functional genes within the categories of carbon cycling, metal resistance, organic remediation, and stress increased in July compared to June sediments, but were not significant (p>0.05). In contrast, Marsh sediment functional genes significantly decreased (p<0.05) between June and July in all functional gene categories, specifically carbon cycling, organic remediation, and stress. 