Significant (p<0.05) associations were observed between TPH and genes involved in degrading alkanes, alkynes, cycloalkanes, aromatic carboxylic acids, chlorinated aromatics, polycyclic aromatics, and other aromatics (Figure 8) suggesting that these genes were actively involved in degrading the oil that impacted the salt marsh. Similar findings have been reported in which hydrocarbon degrading genes were enriched in a deep-sea Deepwater Horizon oil plume [24], [27]. The salt marsh vegetation appeared to act as traps for the oil coming ashore. Oil was visible on marsh grass leaves and higher concentrations were detected within the Marsh sediments compared to the open Inlet during the early months of impact (Figure 2). Oil in the Marsh sediments, however, decreased significantly within one month and was no longer detected by September 2010, whereas oil in the Inlet sediments increased in July before declining in September. The greater decrease of oil in Marsh sediments compared to the Inlet sediments may have been a result of microbial degradation that was enhanced by the plant rhizosphere. The presence of marsh vegetation, such as S. alterniflora [40] and J. roemerianus [41], has been shown to decrease oil concentrations in sediments possibly due to plant uptake, increased aeration in the root zone, and/or production of root exudates that may promote oil mineralization and microbial hydrocarbon degradation. Enzymes, such as laccase, dehalogenase, nitroreductase, nitrilase, peroxidase, and cytochrome P450, supplied by roots and/or associated bacteria have been shown to aid in the detoxification of organic pollutants within the rhizosphere [e.g. 42,60,61]. Indeed, several of the genes that code for these enzymes (phenol oxidase, rd, pbnA, ALN, nitA, lip, mnp, P450, BpH) were significantly (p<0.05) higher in relative abundance in Marsh sediments compared to the Inlet suggesting a synergistic plant-microbe interaction within the salt marsh that may have been important in hydrocarbon degradation in these sediments. Anaerobic degradation of hydrocarbons may also have contributed to the removal of oil from the salt marsh sediments. Regardless of oxygen-saturated overlying waters, dissolved oxygen has been shown to diffuse only within the top few millimeters of the sediment-water interface [62], [63], [64], thereby creating reducing conditions that may contribute to the anaerobic degradation of hydrocarbons in association with sulfate reduction, denitrification, and methanogenesis [65], [66], [67], [68]. Genes associated with anaerobic mechanisms, such as sulfate reduction (dsrA/B), methanogenesis (mcrA), and denitrification (narG, nirK, nirS, and nosZ), were detected throughout the salt marsh, along with several bacteria known to anaerobically degrade hydrocarbons, such as Rhodocyclaceae, Geobacteraceae, and Desulfobacteraceae (Table 5), suggesting that the anaerobic biodegradation of hydrocarbons could have occurred within the sediments. Our results indicate that the microbial community structure and function of the coastal salt marsh was altered during the months of oil inundation from the Deepwater Horizon oil spill. The amount of incoming oil, its heterogeneous distribution within the sediments of the salt marsh, warm summer temperatures, and available nutrients may have played key roles in the efficient removal of oil that was undetectable within five months based on our samplings. The significant increase in response to the oil of the indigenous microbial population containing known hydrocarbon-degrading bacteria coupled with a subsequent increase in hydrocarbon degradation functional genes provides evidence that in situ bioremediation contributed to the degradation of oil at this site. These results suggest that in highly sensitive environments, such as salt marshes and estuaries that support a naturally occurring hydrocarbon-degrading microbial population, natural attenuation may be a preferable means of remediation to other mechanical strategies that can cause irreparable damage to the habitat. However, further comprehensive microbial studies are needed in Gulf of Mexico areas, where the threat of oil spills is an ongoing issue, in order to establish base-line microbial and ecological data so that the impacts of oil spills, such as the Deepwater Horizon, may be fully evaluated in the future. 