are key for dissipation of hydrocarbon pollution on maritime beaches. Previous laboratory experiments performed with beach sediment from the site of the field experiment reported here (Stert Flats, United Kingdom) had shown that addition of nutrients strongly stimulated oil degradation in this beach sediment (21). However, a comparison of the characteristics of oil degradation revealed differences between the laboratory and field experiments. Degradation in nutrient-amended laboratory experiments was faster, and n-alkanes were depleted within 1 month. Also, the extent of oil degradation was greater in the laboratory experiments. In laboratory microcosms, phenanthrenes and dibenzothiophenes were degraded, but this was not observed in the field experiment. Large changes in community structure occurred in the laboratory experiments in which the preparations were amended with liquid fertilizer, while addition of liquid fertilizer had only some short-term effects on community structure in the field. The differences probably are related to differences in the experimental conditions in the laboratory and field studies. In the laboratory experiment a temperature of 20°C was maintained. Although tidal cycles were simulated in the laboratory experiment, the amount of water added to the microcosm per cycle (1 liter per microcosm containing 1.3 kg of sediment) was relatively small compared to the field situation, and this was probably the cause of the relatively high residual concentrations of nutrients that were maintained in the microcosms, despite the use of water-soluble fertilizer. In the field experiment the nitrogen concentrations in the plots treated with liquid fertilizer were in general not significantly different from those in the unfertilized, oil-treated plots, and this may well explain the minor differences in bacterial communities noted in the majority of these plots. Nutrient levels are an important factor in structuring microbial communities, as discussed below. The obvious differences between the field and laboratory experiments indicate that great care should be taken when results of laboratory experiments are extrapolated to field situations, and they underline the need to support results obtained in the laboratory with field experiments (27). Nevertheless, some similarities between field and laboratory experiments were observed. With the slow-release fertilizer treatment significantly higher nutrient concentrations were maintained in the pore water, similar to the high nutrient concentrations maintained in the laboratory experiments with liquid fertilizer (21). In both cases, a sustained change in bacterial community structure occurred. Furthermore, in both field and laboratory experiments selection for Alcanivorax-like bacteria was noted. A. borkumensis is capable of using only a few organic substrates, especially alkanes (36) and the alkyl groups of n-alkylbenzenes and n-alkylcycloalkanes (7). Alkanes are among the most easily degradable oil components (2). Our observation is the second observation that these bacteria are important components of an oil-degrading community in the field, indicating their significance in hydrocarbon degradation. Previously, the presence of Alcanivorax was noted in beach oil paste and seawater after an oil spill in the Japan Sea (14). Clear selection for P. stutzeri was also observed. P. stutzeri is capable of aerobic degradation of many pollutants (5, 12, 15, 23, 34), and a strain closely related to P. stutzeri (99.6% 16S rRNA sequence identity to clone SR11d28) has been reported to degrade naphthalene under denitrifying conditions (20). Interestingly, 16S rRNA gene sequences related to P. stutzeri were not detected in laboratory experiments in which sediments from the same beach used in this field study were used (515 clones were screened) (21). Significantly greater hydrocarbon degradation during the first 80 days of the experiment occurred in the oil-treated plots treated with fertilizer than in the oil-treated plots that received no fertilizer. However, the oil-treated plots that received no fertilizer did show significant degradation over time. Remarkably, only a few, very-short-lived significant differences in bacterial community structure were observed between the oil-treated plots that received no fertilizer and the oil-treated plots treated with liquid fertilizer, while no significant differences were observed between the oil-treated plots that received no fertilizer and the non-oil-treated control plots. Interestingly, in laboratory experiments Wikström et al. (35) noted changes in the microbial community of groundwater contaminated with nitroaromatic compounds following amendment with hydrocarbons to which the microbial community had not been previously exposed, but not after amendment with excessive amounts of hydrocarbons to which the microbial community had been exposed previously. 