Degradation of buried oil was monitored by measuring carbon dioxide production in the field and by analysis of oil composition. Bacterial community structure was determined by cultivation-independent analysis of PCR-amplified 16S rRNA gene fragments and 16S rRNA by denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis (DGGE) and analysis of 16S rRNA gene clone libraries (18). Numerical analysis of the DGGE profiles (21) was used to assess changes in bacterial community structure and to statistically evaluate the effect of bioremediation treatments and plot location on bacterial community structure. Previous Section Next Section MATERIALS AND METHODS Field site.Stert Flats in Somerset, United Kingdom (51°12.3′N, 03°03.9′W), is a mudflat with fine sand (mud content, 3.2%; 80% of the particles with diameters ranging from 125 to 180 μm) deposited on the upper part of the intertidal zone. Details of the sediment properties have been described previously (21). The fine sand is highly mobile and moves between 7 and 13 cm during a single tide. The site has a history of oil contamination, including previous oil spill field experiments (30). The beach has a shallow gradient (on average, 4.2% in the sandy area) and is generally subjected to low wave energy. The amount of time that the experimental plots were covered by the tide depended on the height of the tide and the lunar cycle; however, observations made during the experiment showed that the minimum coverage time was approximately 1 h for each tidal cycle. Experimental design.A completely randomized block design was used, with three blocks each containing four randomly assigned treatment plots receiving different treatments. The treatments and their designations were as follows: UC, control that was not treated with oil (no oil, no bioremediation treatment); OC, oil-treated control (treated with oil, no bioremediation treatment); SR, treated with oil and with slow-release fertilizer; and LF, treated with oil and with liquid inorganic fertilizer added regularly. The plots were marked out on an approximately 90-m stretch of the upper intertidal zone by using stainless steel poles on 28 June 1999. Nitex nylon mesh enclosures (pore size, 200 μm; length, 63 cm; width, 96 cm; depth, 7 cm) were filled with oil-treated (OC, LF, and SR plots) or untreated (UC plots) beach material and closed with a Nitex nylon mesh lid by using safety clips. Within each enclosure a smaller Nitex nylon bag (pore size, 200 μm; length, 30 cm; width, 30 cm; depth, 2.5 cm) was placed. This bag was used to measure CO2 production. The enclosures were anchored to the steel poles and were buried in the beach at a depth of 10 cm 4 m apart to avoid cross contamination. Emulsified, weathered Forties crude oil was applied at a rate of 70 g of oil per kg of beach sediment in metal trays, and the preparations were thoroughly mixed before they were placed in the mesh enclosures in the OC, LF, and SR plots. The oil was weathered by agitation with air at room temperature until a constant weight was obtained. This process removed 20% of the oil by volume. The oil was then emulsified with artificial seawater (Instant Ocean) by using a mechanical mixer (Silverson, Bucks, Chesham, United Kingdom) to form a 25% water-oil emulsion. The weathering and emulsification were used to simulate oil spilled at sea and washed ashore. The LF and SR plots were treated with fertilizer 1 week after oil application (6 July 1999); 4.17 g of NaNO3 per kg of sediment and 0.30 g of KH2PO4 per kg of sediment were applied in solution to LF plots once a week for 15 weeks (the last application was on 15 October 1999). Fertilizer was added by adding nitrogen N and phosphorus P at levels that were 1 and 0.1% of the mass of oil, respectively. The SR plots received the same total amount of N as the LF plots received over a 15-week period, in the form of a single addition of 5.5 kg of Osmocote 14-14-14 (Scotts, Ipswich, United Kingdom), an organic resin-coated granular fertilizer containing 14% N, 14% P, and 14% K with controlled release over 4 months; 5.2 kg of Osmocote was placed in a mesh bag that was anchored into the beach sediment within each mesh enclosure containing oil-treated sediment. The smaller nylon enclosure used for carbon dioxide measurements contained a mesh bag with 0.3 kg of Osmocote. Carbon dioxide measurements.During the first 2 weeks, microbial activity was determined on a daily basis by monitoring CO2 evolution by an in situ respirometry method described previously (27). For measurement of CO2 production the small mesh bags were removed from the plots and placed on a clean plastic bag on the beach surface nearby. A flux box was placed over the bag and was gently pushed into the beach surface around the bag to obtain a good seal. The air within the flux box was circulated through the cell of an infrared gas analyzer (Servomex, Crowborough, United Kingdom) in order to determine CO2 production. 