Bacterial Community Dynamics and Hydrocarbon Degradation during a Field-Scale Evaluation of Bioremediation on a Mudflat Beach Contaminated with Buried Oil. A field-scale experiment with a complete randomized block design was performed to study the degradation of buried oil on a shoreline over a period of almost 1 year. The following four treatments were examined in three replicate blocks: two levels of fertilizer treatment of oil-treated plots, one receiving a weekly application of liquid fertilizer and the other treated with a slow-release fertilizer; and two controls, one not treated with oil and the other treated with oil but not with fertilizer. Oil degradation was monitored by measuring carbon dioxide evolution and by chemical analysis of the oil. Buried oil was degraded to a significantly greater extent in fertilized plots, but no differences in oil chemistry were observed between the two different fertilizer treatments, although carbon dioxide production was significantly higher in the oil-treated plots that were treated with slow-release fertilizer during the first 14 days of the experiment. Bacterial communities present in the beach sediments were profiled by denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis (DGGE) analysis of PCR-amplified 16S rRNA gene fragments and 16S rRNA amplified by reverse transcriptase PCR. Similarities between the DGGE profiles were calculated, and similarity matrices were subjected to statistical analysis. These analyses showed that although significant hydrocarbon degradation occurred both in plots treated with oil alone and in the plots treated with oil and liquid fertilizer, the bacterial community structure in these plots was, in general, not significantly different from that in the control plots that were not treated with oil and did not change over time. In contrast, the bacterial community structure in the plots treated with oil and slow-release fertilizer changed rapidly, and there were significant differences over time, as well as between blocks and even within plots. The differences were probably related to the higher concentrations of nutrients measured in interstitial water from the plots treated with slow-release fertilizer. Bacteria with 16S rRNA sequences closely related (>99.7% identity) to Alcanivorax borkumensis and Pseudomonas stutzeri sequences dominated during the initial phase of oil degradation in the plots treated with slow-release fertilizer. Field data were compared to the results of previous laboratory microcosm experiments, which revealed significant differences. The ability to degrade hydrocarbon components of crude oil is widespread among marine bacteria (10), and bioremediation has proven to be an effective method for cleaning up residual oil in a variety of coastal environments, such as rocky shorelines (6) and pebble (29) and coarse sand (33) beaches. Due to the high carbon content of oil and the low levels of other nutrients essential for microbial growth, treatment of beached oil with phosphorus and nitrogen is generally required to enhance the growth of hydrocarbon-degrading bacteria and to stimulate oil degradation (3, 6, 27). Most oil spill bioremediation studies have focused on surface contamination of relatively coarse shoreline sediments (6, 28, 29, 33), and much less attention has been paid to fine sediments, such as those found in the upper reaches of mudflats around the coast of the United Kingdom. Oil deposited on these beaches is readily buried under clean sediment by tidal action and is therefore difficult to clean by conventional methods. Suitable nutrient amendment levels required for optimal hydrocarbon biodegradation are often determined by laboratory incubations. Laboratory microcosm studies performed with sediment collected from a beach used in the present field study demonstrated that a wide range of nutrient additions selected for different bacterial communities, but oil was degraded to similar extents irrespective of the structure of the predominant bacterial communities present (21). However, laboratory incubations do not necessarily accurately reflect field conditions, and field trials must be conducted to corroborate findings of laboratory experiments (28). In experiments to assess hydrocarbon degradation on contaminated shorelines, careful attention must be paid to experimental design (33). Unknown and uncontrollable factors, like longshore currents, spatially distinct underground flows, and winds, may have different effects on different parts of the same experimental area. These effects can be accounted for by using a completely randomized block design, in which treatments are replicated and randomly assigned to replicate blocks. A completely randomized block design allows assignment of statistically significant differences to treatments. In recent years such a design has been used to determine the effects of bioremediation treatments on oil degradation on polluted beaches (17, 29, 33). Microbial community structure has been studied in detail in only one experiment in which a completely randomized block design was used (17). However, in that study, samples from the early stages of the bioremediation were not analyzed, and the effects of treatment and block position on microbial community structure were not statistically assessed. In order to fill gaps in our understanding of the potential of bioremediation of buried oil on mudflat beaches and the effects of treatment and plot allocation on bacterial community structure, we performed a field experiment with a completely randomized block design. Four different treatments were randomly assigned to three replicate blocks prepared on a fine-sediment beach, Stert Flats in the United Kingdom. The treatments consisted of two controls, one not treated with oil and the other treated with oil, and two bioremediated plots, one treated with oil and liquid fertilizer and the other treated with oil and slow-release fertilizer. 