Degradation of oil on beaches is, in general, limited by the supply of inorganic nutrients. In order to obtain a more systematic understanding of the effects of nutrient addition on oil spill bioremediation, beach sediment microcosms contaminated with oil were treated with different levels of inorganic nutrients. Oil biodegradation was assessed respirometrically and on the basis of changes in oil composition. Bacterial communities were compared by numerical analysis of denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis (DGGE) profiles of PCR-amplified 16S rRNA genes and cloning and sequencing of PCR-amplified 16S rRNA genes. Nutrient amendment over a wide range of concentrations significantly improved oil degradation, confirming that N and P limited degradation over the concentration range tested. However, the extent and rate of oil degradation were similar for all microcosms, indicating that, in this experiment, it was the addition of inorganic nutrients rather than the precise amount that was most important operationally. Very different microbial communities were selected in all of the microcosms. Similarities between DGGE profiles of replicate samples from a single microcosm were high (95% ± 5%), but similarities between DGGE profiles from replicate microcosms receiving the same level of inorganic nutrients (68% ± 5%) were not significantly higher than those between microcosms subjected to different nutrient amendments (63% ± 7%). Therefore, it is apparent that the different communities selected cannot be attributed to the level of inorganic nutrients present in different microcosms. Bioremediation treatments dramatically reduced the diversity of the bacterial community. The decrease in diversity could be accounted for by a strong selection for bacteria belonging to the alkane-degrading Alcanivorax/Fundibacter group. On the basis of Shannon-Weaver indices, rapid recovery of the bacterial community diversity to preoiling levels of diversity occurred. However, although the overall diversity was similar, there were considerable qualitative differences in the community structure before and after the bioremediation treatments. Although accidental releases account for only a small percentage of the oil released into the marine environment, large oil spills attract much public attention and cause environmental concern. Spill incidents have prompted research on cost-effective, environmentally benign cleanup strategies. Physical and, on rare occasions, chemical methods are capable of rapidly removing the majority of beached oil, but they are rarely completely successful (33). Natural degradative processes aid in removing the remaining oil. Bacteria are considered to represent the predominant agents of hydrocarbon degradation in the environment (27), and hydrocarbon-degrading bacteria are ubiquitous. More than 20 genera of marine hydrocarbon-degrading bacteria, distributed over several (sub)phyla (α-, β-, and γ-proteobacteria; Gram positives; Flexibacter-Cytophaga-Bacteroides) have been described so far (5, 13, 16-18, 22, 48). As a single species typically is capable of degrading only a limited number of the compounds found in crude oil, a consortium composed of many different bacterial species is usually involved in oil degradation. Because of the high carbon content of oil and the low level of other nutrients essential for microbial growth, the rate and extent of degradation are, in general, limited by the low availability of nitrogen and phosphorus (2, 33). Consequently, growth of hydrocarbon-degrading bacteria and hydrocarbon degradation can be strongly enhanced by fertilization with inorganic N and P. This has proven an effective bioremediation treatment on several types of shorelines (4, 40, 41, 46). Bioremediation studies have, in general, been dominated by an empirical approach, and optimum nutrient amendment levels are often informed by laboratory incubations. In the field, care must be taken in supplying optimum concentrations of inorganic nutrients. Too high concentrations may result in eutrophication, and too low concentrations may result in suboptimal biodegradation. A better understanding of the systematic effects of nutrient amendment on biodegradative microbial populations and the progress of bioremediation would assist the development of more rational bioremediation strategies (21, 37). Therefore, laboratory beach microcosm experiments were performed to determine the effects of different levels of N and P supply on oil degradation and bacterial community dynamics. Microbial communities were characterized by using cultivation-independent molecular techniques (16S rRNA gene [rDNA] PCR-based denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis [DGGE] [31] and clone libraries). Numerical analysis (34) was used to assess changes in microbial community structure and the effects of bioremediation treatments. 