Comparable observations have been made for a functionally stable methanogenic reactor fed with glucose (15). This reactor revealed considerable dynamics in microbial communities over a 605-day period, despite minimal differences in performance over time. Bioremediation treatments are aimed at stimulating pollutant-degrading microorganisms to speed the recovery of contaminated ecosystem to a prepollution state in terms of biodiversity and ecosystem function. In this study, changes in the predominant bacterial populations occurred in all of the microcosms, except that which received inorganic nutrients but not oil. Oiling and especially bioremediation led to a strong decrease in bacterial community diversity at day 6, but a rapid recovery to near preoiling levels of diversity occurred subsequently. Still, despite having a similar level of biodiversity, the component organisms contributing to that diversity were somewhat different from the original community, as revealed by DGGE analysis and clone libraries. Following bioremediation, α-proteobacteria were dominant by day 26 of the experiment, whereas prior to oil contamination, they had only represented 8% of the clones in the libraries. Sequences from α-proteobacteria most closely related to Erythrobacter spp. were most commonly encountered. Erythrobacter spp. belong to the aerobic anoxygenic phototrophic bacteria (49). They metabolize organic substrates, with light enhancing their growth. Recently, it was revealed that aerobic anoxygenic phototrophic bacteria play a critical role in the carbon cycle in the ocean (26). Aerobic anoxygenic phototrophic bacteria grow well in high-nutrient media and are often isolated from environments with a high level of organic matter content (49), as well as from intertidal beach sediments (36). Recently, a PAH-degrading bacterium most closely related to Erythrobacter spp., Lutibacterium anuloederans LC8, was isolated from intertidal beach sediments (8). The rRNA gene of L. anuloederans shows 95.3 to 96.1% similarity to our Erythrobacter-like sequences. An α-proteobacterial sequence related to Erythrobacter spp. was also detected in beach sediments from an oil spill bioremediation field experiment conducted in Delaware (30). Perhaps the most dramatic observation made in the present study was the rapid and strong selection for γ-proteobacteria in oil-treated microcosms. The γ-proteobacteria persisted in clone libraries from sediment samples treated with oil alone taken on day 26, while they were replaced by α-proteobacteria in microcosms treated with oil and inorganic nutrients. This may reflect slow ongoing alkane degradation in the microcosms not treated with inorganic nutrients and selection of organisms growing on residual PAH and secondary products of hydrocarbon degradation in the bioremediated microcosms. A field experiment on shoreline sediments in the Norwegian Arctic (19) revealed an increase in γ-proteobacteria in oil-contaminated beach sediments, while the microbial community of beached oil paste after the Nakhodka oil spill accident in the Japan Sea was also dominated by γ-proteobacteria (25). These results are consistent with our observation of a strong dominance by γ-proteobacteria, and this may be a characteristic of bacterial communities associated with recently spilled oil. In our case, it was mainly members of the Alcanivorax/Fundibacter group that were selected. Alcanivorax borkumensis (48) and Fundibacter jadensis (5) were described recently. Both are capable of using only a few organic substrates, especially alkanes (5, 48) and the alkyl groups of n-alkylbenzenes and n-alkylcycloalkanes (11). Alkanes are major oil components, explaining why Alcanivorax/Fundibacter-like sequences made a significant contribution (up to 73%) to clone libraries early in the bioremediation process and for a longer period when the hydrocarbon degradation rate was lower. Because of biases associated with PCR and cloning (47), these clone percentages probably do not directly represent Alcanivorax cell numbers, but since all samples were analyzed in the same fashion and the predominance of Alcanivorax-like sequences in the clone libraries was so dramatic, it is likely that our results do reflect a genuine increase in the relative abundance of this group of bacteria. Furthermore, fluorescence in situ hybridization analyses have shown that Alcanivorax constituted more than 90% of the entire microbial community in laboratory incubations of seawater supplemented with oil (43). 