A culture-independent molecular phylogenetic approach was used to survey constituents of microbial communities associated with an aquifer contaminated with hydrocarbons (mainly jet fuel) and chlorinated solvents undergoing intrinsic bioremediation. Samples were obtained from three redox zones: methanogenic, methanogenic-sulfate reducing, and iron or sulfate reducing. Small-subunit rRNA genes were amplified directly from aquifer material DNA by PCR with universally conserved or Bacteria- orArchaea-specific primers and were cloned. A total of 812 clones were screened by restriction fragment length polymorphisms (RFLP), approximately 50% of which were unique. All RFLP types that occurred more than once in the libraries, as well as many of the unique types, were sequenced. A total of 104 (94 bacterial and 10 archaeal) sequence types were determined. Of the 94 bacterial sequence types, 10 have no phylogenetic association with known taxonomic divisions and are phylogenetically grouped in six novel division level groups (candidate divisions WS1 to WS6); 21 belong to four recently described candidate divisions with no cultivated representatives (OP5, OP8, OP10, and OP11); and 63 are phylogenetically associated with 10 well-recognized divisions. The physiology of two particularly abundant sequence types obtained from the methanogenic zone could be inferred from their phylogenetic association with groups of microorganisms with a consistent phenotype. One of these sequence types is associated with the genus Syntrophus; Syntrophus spp. produce energy from the anaerobic oxidation of organic acids, with the production of acetate and hydrogen. The organism represented by the other sequence type is closely related to Methanosaetaspp., which are known to be capable of energy generation only through aceticlastic methanogenesis. We hypothesize, therefore, that the terminal step of hydrocarbon degradation in the methanogenic zone of the aquifer is aceticlastic methanogenesis and that the microorganisms represented by these two sequence types occur in syntrophic association. The use of natural attenuation as a cleanup method for underground storage tank sites with petroleum-contaminated soil and groundwater has increased dramatically over the last few years. Since 1995, natural attenuation has been the most common treatment for contaminated groundwater and the second most common treatment for contaminated soil at these sites. About 17,000 contaminated groundwater sites (47% of active sites) and 29,000 contaminated soil sites (28% of active sites) are being remediated through natural attenuation (43). In order for a regulatory agency to approve the cleanup of a contaminated site via natural attenuation, the occurrence of natural attenuation must be demonstrated by various lines of evidence. One such line of evidence is historical groundwater and/or soil chemistry data that demonstrate decreasing contaminant mass and/or concentration over time at relevant sampling points (44). This decrease may be due to contaminant sorption, dilution, volatilization, and nonbiological and biological breakdown. The biological breakdown, or intrinsic bioremediation, of hydrocarbons is particularly beneficial, because it ultimately converts hydrocarbons to carbon dioxide, water, and methane, rather than simply repartitioning the hydrocarbons. Methods for demonstrating biological activity at a site include sampling for intermediates of biological hydrocarbon metabolism, demonstration of electron acceptor depletion, microcosm studies, and description of the microbial community at the site, specifically identifying organisms believed to be responsible for the metabolism of contaminants (5, 19, 44). The identification of organisms has traditionally been achieved by cultivation techniques such as plate counting. However, because typically >99% of naturally occurring microorganisms are not cultivated by standard techniques (2), alternate methods must be used to describe community constituents. One such method is the identification of rRNA genes (rDNA) in DNA extracted directly from the environment, typically via PCR amplification, cloning, and sequencing (2, 31). A number of molecular microbial diversity studies of soil communities have been reported (6, 7, 20, 23, 24,39), but there has been no similar analysis of a contaminated aquifer undergoing intrinsic bioremediation. The subjects of the present study are the microbial communities associated with a contaminated aquifer located on the former Wurtsmith Air Force Base in Michigan. Waste fuels and chlorinated solvents were applied to site FT-2 (Fig. 1) from 1952 to 1986 for the purpose of fire-fighting training. Concentrations of benzene, toluene, ethylbenzene, and xylenes in the plume range from 20 to 1,000 μg/liter; concentrations of dichloroethane, chloroethane, and vinyl chloride range from 2 to 1,000 μg/liter (14,45). Most of the contamination is associated with aquifer solids; total petroleum hydrocarbon analyses showed an average of 13,650 mg/kg between 4.5 and 5.7 m below the ground surface. 