However, there was no evidence of anaerobic degradation in laboratory microcosms in which strict anaerobic conditions were maintained, suggesting that continuous flow or periodic refreshment of the groundwater with oxygen may be important for in situ benzene degradation. There is strong evidence that the most abundant aerobic micro-organisms detected in clone libraries are benzene degraders, for example: (1) they are from genera typically associated with degradation of aromatic hydrocarbons in freshwater environments – indeed the clones related to Polaromonas naphthalenivorans were identical (on the basis of 16S rRNA similarity) to a clone demonstrated by stable-isotope probing to derive from an organism catabolizing naphthalene (Jeon et al. 2003); (2) benzene was the main source of carbon and energy in groundwater samples; (3) clones detected in situ in this study were very similar to those selectively enriched in aerobic benzene-degrading microcosms (Hydrogenophaga sp., Pseudomonas sp., and Rhodococcus erythropolis) in the study by Fahy et al. (2006); and (4) we have isolated some strains very closely related to the predominant clones and shown that they degrade benzene aerobically (Fahy et al. 2008). An important question that arises is whether the in situ concentrations of dissolved oxygen are sufficient to support degradation of benzene. Benzene biodegradation has previously been shown to occur microaerophilically at 0·05 mg l−1 of oxygen (Yerushalmi et al. 2001), with catechol, benzoate and phenol detected as intermediates. It is therefore not unreasonable to assume that it can occur at 0·03 mg l−1 or that there are periods of time when, or locations where, oxygen concentrations exceed those measured in this study. There are several scenarios that could explain our findings. Benzene mineralization could occur in series, with facultative microaerophiles (like the predominant Pseudomonas or Polaromonas species) being responsible for ring-opening, and anaerobes benefiting from the local removal of oxygen and metabolizing oxidation products like catechol, benzoate or phenol that are more readily degraded than benzene. Alternatively, parallel anaerobic and aerobic processes could be occurring, as there will be regions of anoxia and areas where more oxygen is present in the heterogeneous sandy sediments, owing to localized microbial activity, formation of biofilms and differential compaction of sediments. Although other BTEX compounds are at least an order of magnitude less abundant than benzene in the four groundwaters, it is possible that some of the anaerobic microbes found in clone libraries are involved in their degradation, because methyl- and ethyl-substituted benzenes are more readily degraded than benzene under anaerobic conditions. The close co-existence of aerobes and anaerobes is not only possible in a heterogeneous environment such as an aquifer (Bakermans and Madsen 2002; Bakermans et al. 2002), but has been shown to occur in liquid culture (Wimpenny and Abdollahi 1991; Gerritse and Gottschal 1993). For example, the strict aerobe, Comamonas testosteroni, and strict anaerobe, Methanosarcina barkeri, grew together, with the aerobe consuming the oxygen that was supplied at a very low level, maintaining it below the concentration that was inhibitory to the methanogen (Gerritse and Gottschal 1993). The stable co-existence of such metabolically diverse species in low-oxygen-concentration chemostat cultures has parallels with the situation in groundwater DW3d (with a net dissolved oxygen concentration of 0·03 mg l−1), where strictly anaerobic methanogens live alongside aerobic members of the Comamonadaceae. The most abundant clones were very similar to the aerobe Polaromonas naphthalenivorans (Comamonadaceae), while the main Archaea were aceticlastic methanogens, closely related to those considered to play a role in anaerobic degradation of hydrocarbons, for example in a crude oil storage cavity (Watanabe et al. 2002) and a hydrocarbon-contaminated aquifer (Dojka et al. 1998). Moreover, in groundwater DW3d, two clones most closely related to syntrophic bacteria (Syntrophus spp.) from a methanogenic alkane-degrading consortium (Zengler et al. 1999), and seven clones similar to members of the Bacteroidetes from a benzene-mineralizing anaerobic consortium (Phelps et al. 1998), are implicated as a possible link in the carbon and energy flow from primary degraders to the aceticlastic methanogens (Grbić-Galić and Vogel 1987; Kazumi et al. 1997; Dojka et al. 1998; Weiner and Lovley 1998; Zengler et al. 1999; Caldwell and Suflita 2000; Grabowski et al. 2005). Groundwater DW3d, therefore, has the necessary microbial components for serial or parallel aerobic–anaerobic degradation of benzene. 