Standards. Standards for the alkB gene were constructed from one of the clones described above. The plasmid was subjected to amplification with M13 primers to obtain a PCR product approximately 300 bp long containing the 100-bp alkB fragment. Use of the plasmid itself may result in an incorrect determination of the amount of DNA present due to the presence of supercoiled DNA, and it is recommended that there is at least 20 bp outside of the primer binding sites when constructing standards from a PCR product (Quantitect SYBRGreen PCR Handbook, Qiagen). The PCR product was purified by using the UltraClean PCR cleanup kit (MoBio) and measured spectrophotometrically at 260 nm. This was diluted in a 10-fold series to create the standards for a five point standard curve (5.8 104 to 5.8 108 copies) that was run in duplicate with each set of samples. Quantification of AlkB in Soil Samples. Real-time PCR assays were carried out on a Rotorgene 3000 (Corbett) by using Quantitect SYBR green PCR kits (Qiagen). The primer concentrations were optimized to 1 pmol of both the forward and reverse primer in each 20 mL reaction. Two microliters of template DNA (whether sample or standard) was added to each reaction. Cycling conditions were as follows: hold for 15 min at 94-C, followed by 35 cycles of denaturing at 84-C for 20 s, annealing at 50-C for 30 s, extension and acquiring signal at 72-C for 45 s, a second acquiring step at 77-C for 15 s; hold at 45-C for 1 min followed by a melt curve from 45-C to 95-C. In addition to melt curve analysis, PCR products were checked on a 2% agarose gel to ensure they were the expected size. Reaction conditions were the same as described above except that 1.5 pmol of each primer was used. Cycling conditions with these primers were as follows: hold for 15 min at 94-C, followed by 35 cycles of denaturing at 88-C for 30 s, annealing 50-C for 30 s, extension and acquiring signal at 72-C for 30 s; hold at 45-C for 1 min followed by a melt curve from 45-C to 95-C. A set of standards (3.8 104 to 3.8 108 copies) was created for this assay in the same manner as that described above for the alkB assay. Most Probable Number Counts. Cultivable bacteria were enumerated using tailored versions of the Wrenn and Venosa MPN count method [31]. Initial soil Table 1. Accession number of sequences used in constructing the alkB primers and the theoretical melt temperature of the amplification product. After a further 4 years in situ, more differences could be observed between the control and the fertilization treatments. The number of copies of both the alkB gene and the rpoB gene g–1 soil are significantly lower in the treatments than in the control, as is the ratio between the two genes. The number of total heterotrophs is significantly greater in the HCRN treatment than in the control. Differences in total heterotrophs and alkane-degrading bacteria are not significantly different from the control at for the LCRN treatment. However, the SAB-degrading bacteria are significantly higher in both the LCRN and HCRN than in the control. The percentage of the bacterial population that is SAB degrading is also higher in the HCRN treatment than in the control (not shown). The comparison between samples taken in 2000 and 2004 show that the total number of bacteria, measured via both real-time PCR and MPN, has increased for the control but has remained at about the same level for both the LCRN and HCRN treatments. The number of copies of the alkB gene g–1 soil, however, has decreased (significantly for LCRN) in the two treatments but increased in the control. No significant differences could be detected between the 2000 and 2004 samples for the MPN of alkane-degrading bacteria. The ratio of alkB: rpoB gene copy numbers is significantly less (Table 2) for all three groups in the samples from 2004. The abundance of SAB-degrading microorganisms (as determined by MPN counts) has increased significantly for both treatments but decreased in the control. 