[6]. In that study, the withinrun CV was 17% (compared to 16% and 18% in our assays) and the between-run CV was 37.5% (compared to 25% and 38% in our assays). The high between-run CV is partially attributable to the log-linear relationship between the raw signal (CT) and the concentration values. To minimize this effect we assayed all the samples, except those that required repeating, in one run. Naturally, this may not be practicable for large studies and caution should be used when interpreting small differences between groups. Many factors—including the amount of sample used for DNA extraction, the efficiency of the extractions, and the presence of PCR inhibitors—affect the number of copies of any genes measured in a sample. To avoid these problems, the ratio of number of copies of the alkB gene (specific to some bacteria) to the rpoB gene (present in all bacteria) was used to look for changes in the microbial population structure. This is analogous to the use of a housekeeping gene in gene expression studies, and indeed the 16S rRNA gene was previously used for this purpose [5]. The proportion of alkB:rpoB genes observed was high: between 50% and 600% (Fig. 2E). This is not a reflection of the actual gene numbers in the samples, but is more likely a result of the differences in amplification efficiencies between the two assays. The average efficiency of the rpoB assay (92%) was lower than the average ef- ficiency of the alkB assay (95%). As the efficiency of each assay was consistent, comparisons between samples are still valid; however, the ratios between the alkB and rpoB genes should be considered as indicative of the community structure rather than absolute percentage values. Although the variability of the MPN results made it more difficult to detect significant differences between groups, where differences were detected, they reflected the same trends as the real-time PCR data. For example, both methods suggest that addition of fertilizer to the soil increased the total number of bacteria present (see Fig. 2C and D). Changes in the Microbial Community after Fertilization. Various studies have shown that the addition of fertilizer to hydrocarbon-contaminated soil increases hydrocarbon degradation (e.g., [3, 7, 19]). However, few studies have followed the microbial population dynamics in any detail, often only showing an increase in the number of total or hydrocarbon-degrading bacteria. Here we show that there is a link between the decrease in the amount of alkanes present with the number of copies of alkB and changes in the microbial community structure. The sum of the n-alkanes remaining in each treatment is shown in Fig. 2G. It is clear that fertilization has stimulated the biodegradation of alkanes as 1 year after the application of fertilizer, both treatments have significantly less n-alkanes remaining than the control, and the higher concentration of fertilizer has the least remaining n-alkanes. After a further 4 years, n-alkanes were only detectable in the control but the concentration was significantly reduced from that in 2000. Although some of the n-alkanes will have been lost through evaporation, the increased loss in the fertilized treatments compared to the control is attributable to increased biodegradation. Our data indicate that fertilization has stimulated the total numbers of bacteria present in these soils as both the rpoB real-time PCR and the total heterotrophic MPN data show that in 2000, the treatments showed signifi- cantly higher levels than the control. In addition, the 2004 samples are generally higher than the 2000 samples. Fertilization had a more complex effect on the hydrocarbon-degrading population. Initially, the fertilization significantly increased the number of copies of alkB g–1 soil: the LCRN samples from 2000 were significantly higher than the control. 