In this study, the PLFAs 18 : 1ω9 and 17 : 1ω8 were increased by diesel bioremediation; the ω9 series of monounsaturated PLFAs have been ascribed to Gram-positive bacteria. This indicates the difficulty of unambiguously explaining changes in PLFAs, when the PLFAs are not found solely in a single taxonomic group. A possible complicating effect is that growth on hydrocarbons may change the lipid profiles of individual strains (Doumenq et al. 1999). It has been suggested that sphingolipids may be genuine biomarkers for hydrocarbon-degrading populations (White et al. 1998; Zelles 1999), but sphingolipids were not measured in this study. The PLFA 18 : 2ω6 can be reliably assigned to the soil fungal community, and the changes in 18 : 2ω6 observed at day 27 indicates that there was an increase in the fungal community caused by diesel addition. Direct comparison of Biolog and PLFA It is instructive to compare directly the performance of the two community-level techniques. Several previous studies have done this for soil microbial communities (e.g. Bååth et al. 1998; Bossio and Scow 1998; Yao et al. 2000), but none directly for the assessment of oil contamination and bioremediation. The clearest difference is that the Biolog CLPPs were much more affected by incubation than were the PLFA profiles. Thus, in one sense, the CLPPs were more `sensitive' than PLFA profiling and may suggest important changes in the properties of the culturable micro-organisms. This sensitivity to incubation, however, is not useful in the context of assessing changes caused by an external treatment, in this case diesel addition and bioremediation. The effects of diesel addition are much more clearly observed in the PLFA profiles than the Biolog CLPPs, particularly when data from all the time points are analysed simultaneously. White et al. (1998) suggested that the multivariate response of the microbial community, i.e. the community profile, could be used to evaluate the success of bioremediation; a perturbation observed in multivariate space, followed by a return to control levels, would indicate that bioremediation had successfully mitigated the impact on the microbial community. In this study, there was no evidence of a return to control profiles for the Biolog CLPPs. There was some indication that the microbial community structure may have returned to control profiles for the PLFA data. The IN diesel-contaminated soil shows the greatest deviation from uncontaminated soils at day 27, and is progressively closer to the control soils at day 63 and day 102 (Fig. 7). Furthermore, the control and diesel-contaminated soils are separated along PC 1 for the days 27 and 63 data, but along a combination of PCs 1 and 2 for the day 102 data (Fig. 8), i.e. the amount of variation in the dataset attributable to diesel contamination had decreased. In conclusion, this study has confirmed the null hypothesis: diesel contamination of different soil types did not lead to increasing similarity of the microbial communities. In fact, the effect of diesel on both PLFA and Biolog profiles was to make much more distinct the separation between soil types. It appears that soil types, representing differing environmental matrices and different initial microbial communities, have different inherent microbial responses to hydrocarbon contamination and thus, possibly, degradation potential. 