Selection of MT carbon sources The MT carbon sources were selected on the basis of their expected occurrence as intermediates in hydrocarbon degradation pathways (Singer and Finnerty 1984). Carboxylic acids were chosen, rather than the parent hydrocarbons, as they possess greater water solubility and lower volatility than the equivalent hydrocarbons. Carboxylic acids have been shown to accumulate and then degrade in oil-contaminated microcosms (Watson et al. 1999). Mesarch and Nies (1997) showed that TPH in contaminated soil samples was correlated with the numbers of bacteria culturable on benzoate as a carbon source. Lack of response to MT carbon sources It is not known why there was no effect of oil contamination on the ability of the soil culturable communities in this study to utilize hydrocarbon-based carboxylic acids as carbon sources. One possibility is that the amount of carboxylic acid added to the microtitre wells was inhibitory for the aromatic compounds, and that a lower concentration would have permitted growth and hence, potentially differing responses (Fulthorpe and Allen 1994). A second possibility is that there was no enrichment of aromatic hydrocarbon degraders during the course of the experiment, i.e. that only the aliphatic portion of the diesel oil was being degraded, and that the capability of the indigenous population to grow on straight-chain aliphatic carboxylic acids was already so high that it was not enhanced by diesel addition. All of the soils showed the ability to degrade all of the straight-chain aliphatic carboxylic acids tested from the beginning of the experiment. Biolog GN profiles: community response to oil pollution The first impression that is received on examining the PCA scores plot of the entire Biolog GN dataset (Fig. 5) is that the major shift in community profiles has occurred as a result of incubation, and outweighs the effects of oil addition. Other studies using Biolog plates have also reported large incubation effects (Wünsche et al. 1995). Further information on the effects of diesel contamination on the similarity of different community profiles is therefore easier to see when the data from each sampling point are analysed separately (Fig. 6). There is no obvious clustering at day 1. The only clear effect is that CW tends to have higher PC1 scores, but there is by no means complete separation from the other two soil types. This lack of differentiation of soil types was unexpected; possibly, the disturbance of the soils entailed by mixing and transferring to microcosms tended to reduce differences between the soil types. Certainly the soil respiration was increased over the levels that then prevailed for the remainder of the experiment (Fig. 2), which would imply that microbial activity had been disturbed. As very little is known about the dynamics and short-term effects of disturbance on Biolog community profiles, this must remain a conjectural point until further work is done. It is clear that diesel addition did not increase the similarity between different soil types, as measured by Biolog CLPPs. In fact, the opposite effect occurred; the difference between soil types increased. There was little differentiation between soil types at the beginning of the experiment. It may be argued that this could have been caused by the initial disturbance of the soil, but throughout the course of the experiment, the control soils tended to cluster together in principal component space. CW is a partial exception to this; the CW controls are separated from the other two soil types at day 27, and one out of the three CW controls is separated at day 62. Conversely, the diesel-contaminated soil types become more dissimilar during the course of the experiment and by day 62, the contaminated samples are completely separated on PC1 according to soil type, with the effect continuing by day 103. It must be borne in mind that the increasing dissimilarity of the diesel-contaminated soil communities in multivariate space does not enable any conclusions to be drawn about absolute diversity of the soils as measured, for example, by species richness or evenness. 