W17 (Kholodii et al., 1995). However, the IR sequences of Tn6032 are very different from those of Tn5053 and its related transposons, Tn402, Tn5468 and Tn7 (Oppon et al., 1998; Minakhina et al., 1999). Furthermore, the resolvase gene in Tn5053 was not found in Tn6032. The 3.8-kb region containing ORF28 and ORF29 shows 90% nucleotide sequence identity to the corresponding region of the 3.8-kb Tn3-family transposon ISTB11 on IncP-1α plasmid pTB11, which was exogenously isolated from a wastewater plant in Germany (Tennstedt et al., 2005). The nucleotide sequence of ISTB11 is distinct from that of other Tn3-family transposons, and its isoforms have not yet been discovered. With respect to the genes involved in aromatic compound degradation, pSKYE1 contains only two genes for phenol hydroxylase and EDO. This situation is very different from that of known bacterial catabolic plasmids, which are usually large (>50 kb) and carry operonic degradative gene clusters (van der Meer et al., 1992; Dennis, 2005). Because of their great lipophilicity and their ability to produce reactive oxygen species, phenol and catechol are potentially toxic to bacterial cells (Benndorf et al., 2001). Wastewater from coke plants contains various organic pollutants, including phenol and mono- and polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (Stamoudis and Luthy, 1980). Therefore, pSKYE1, which carries a ‘detoxification apparatus’ for aromatic compounds, is likely to provide a survival advantage to its host cells in this harsh environment. The same environment might host bacterial strains that cannot degrade aromatic compounds by themselves. These bacteria may be fortunate in having this ‘detoxification apparatus’ functioning in their environment. In our previous study (Suenaga et al., 2007), we used a fosmid vector to clone environmental (that is, activated sludge) DNA fragments of 30–40 kb. These fragments were thought to be suitable for cloning large DNA fragments containing common aromatic compound degradation genes. In this study, we obtained various new insights into the distribution and organization of aromatics degradation genes in the activated sludge microbial community by analyzing the sequences of 38 selected clones. A major finding was that the complete pathways generally recognized as ‘standard’ in previous studies are extremely rare. Only two complete degradation pathways similar to dmp and tdn gene clusters were identified. Instead, various types of gene subsets were identified that were not similar to previously reported ‘upper’ or ‘lower’ pathway modules, suggesting that aromatic compounds in the sampled natural environment are degraded through the concerted actions of various fragmental pathways. Strikingly, a small piece of the aromatics degradation pathway consisting of single-component type phenol hydroxylase and EDO was overrepresented. Taking into account the fact that this module is found on our plasmid-like circular DNA form pSKYE1, we conclude that pSKYE1 has a crucial role in the detoxification of aromatic compounds in our target environment. All of these findings were obtained from the analysis of nucleotides only 1.5 Mb in length. Thus, sequence analysis of metagenomes showing specific functions is extremely useful in uncovering novel findings concerning targeted biological functions and their evolutionary stages across a wide range of bacterial strains. 