Benzene and styrene were clearly removed from all of the cultures first and second, respectively, while the order of removal for toluene, naphthalene, and xylene was more culture dependent (Table 2). Synthetic consortium SC-41 degraded C5+ components in the order benzene-styrene-toluene-naphthalene-xylene. Interestingly, synthetic consortium SC-9 degraded C5+ in the following order: benzene, styrene, naphthalene and toluene simultaneously, and then xylene. Synthetic consortium SC-5 degraded these components in the order benzene-styrene-naphthalene-toluene-xylene. One of the great challenges of microbiology is to find efficient ways to monitor and thereby understand environmental microbial diversity. If environmental microbial diversity can be adequately monitored, then the direction and rate of processes catalyzed by environmental microbial communities may become better understood. This applies both to in situ processes and to processes in controlled environments (e.g., reactors). With respect to in situ processes, Shi et al. (14) defined the differences between microbial community structures in pristine and fuel-contaminated aquifers by using 16S rRNA probes. The fuel-contaminated areas were enriched in members of the β subclass of the class Proteobacteria (β-proteobacteria) and γ-proteobacteria compared to α-proteobacteria (14). Addition of toluene in microcosm studies enriched microorganisms that were only minor constituents of the fuel-contaminated community in situ. These results suggested that characterization of the microbial community change when toluene is added might help identify key toluene degraders in situ. In another recent study the in situ microbial population changes during oil spills were characterized by phospholipid fatty acid analysis and PCR-amplified 16S ribosomal DNA denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis (DGGE) (6). DGGE indicated that oil enhanced the presence of gram-negative α-proteobacteria. Although phospholipid fatty acid analysis indicated that the microbial communities of oil-contaminated and noncontaminated plots were similar after 14 weeks, DGGE still revealed major population differences. With respect to microbial communities in controlled environments, Stoffels et al. (17) extensively characterized degradation of Solvesso 100, a complex mixture of aromatic hydrocarbons used in industrial painting. Inoculation of a fermentor with a sample from a Solvesso 100-laden waste stream resulted in a community in which γ-proteobacteria, especially Pseudomonas spp., were dominant, even though the original inoculum was dominated by α- and β-proteobacteria. Interestingly, the original diversity did not appear to be lost during fermentor enrichment; use of the fermentor culture to inoculate a trickle-bed bioreactor resulted in a community in which α- and β-proteobacteria were dominant. These transitions were established by direct fluorescent in situ hybridization of samples with 16S and 23S rRNA-targeted probes and by performing probe analysis of colonies obtained following plating on different media. Both methods indicated that distinctly different populations derived from the same environmental sample were able to degrade Solvesso 100. Stoffels et al. (17) concluded that establishment of an enrichment culture prior to inoculation of a reactor may result in enrichment of bacteria that do not effectively colonize the reactor. However, this would be a problem only if some of the original diversity in the sample was permanently lost during enrichment. Communities may be merely dynamic (i.e., capable of reestablishing dominance depending on the growth conditions). Our results suggest that contaminated and uncontaminated soils at depths ranging from 0 to 14 m at the ethylene plant site investigated have populations in which specific C5+-degrading bacterial strains are typically community members. The RSGP results for community DNA without enrichment on hydrocarbons revealed community profiles (data not shown) that were more evenly distributed than those obtained following enrichment on hydrocarbons (Fig. 2). Enrichment of similar organisms from diverse backgrounds occurs after exposure to C5+, suggesting that evolution of a single dynamic microbial community occurs during growth on hydrocarbons. 