Soil contaminated with C5+, which contained benzene (45%, wt/wt), dicyclopentadiene (DCPD) plus cyclopentadiene (together 20%), toluene (6%), styrene (3%), xylenes (2%), naphthalene (2%), and smaller quantities of other compounds, served as the source for isolation of 55 genomically distinct bacteria (standards). Use of benzene as a substrate by these bacteria was most widespread (31 of 44 standards tested), followed by toluene (23 of 44), xylenes (14 of 44), styrene (10 of 44), and naphthalene (10 of 44). Master filters containing denatured genomic DNAs of all 55 standards were used to analyze the community compositions of C5+ enrichment cultures by reverse sample genome probing (RSGP). The communities enriched from three contaminated soils were similar to those enriched from three uncontaminated soils from the same site. The compositions of these communities were time dependent and showed a succession of Pseudomonas andRhodococcus spp. before convergence on a composition dominated by Alcaligenes spp. The dominant community members detected by RSGP were capable of benzene degradation at all stages of succession. The enrichments effectively degraded all C5+ components except DCPD. Overall, degradation of individual C5+ hydrocarbons followed first-order kinetics, with the highest rates of removal for benzene. Although degradation of single aromatic compounds by pure strains of hydrocarbon-degrading bacteria is generally well understood, bioremediation processes in the environment usually involve degradation of mixtures of compounds by communities of microorganisms. The biodegradation kinetics for benzene-toluene-ethylbenzene-xylene (BTEX) components by an enrichment culture from gasoline-contaminated soil were recently reported (14). The rates of biodegradation of benzene and toluene were 1 to 2 orders of magnitude lower when the compounds were degraded as gasoline components than when the pure compounds were degraded (22). No attempts were made to evaluate the nature of the microorganisms in the enrichment. Deeb and Alvarez-Cohen (1) also reported that degradation of individual BTEX components differed significantly from degradation of the BTEX mixture. This was demonstrated both for a consortium from gasoline-contaminated soil and for a pure culture of Rhodococcus rhodochrous. When added individually, BTEX components were degraded in the order toluene-benzene-ethylbenzene-xylenes, whereas in BTEX mixtures the ethylbenzene was degraded most rapidly, followed by toluene, benzene, and the xylenes. We have previously reported on degradation of C5+, a complex mixture of aromatic hydrocarbons that is formed during ethane pyrolysis to ethylene during polyethylene production (4, 13, 16). We used reverse sample genome probing (RSGP) in initial experiments to define the communities involved in this process. RSGP involves hybridization of labeled total community DNA with a master filter containing the denatured chromosomal DNAs of genomically distinct bacteria (referred to as standards) isolated from the target environment (20). Initially, a set of 35 standards, isolated primarily on rich media, was used (13). This set was augmented with six standards isolated with toluene as the sole carbon and energy source (4). In the present work we used the C5+ components benzene, styrene, xylenes, and naphthalene to isolate another 14 genomically distinct hydrocarbon degraders. The resulting master filter, representing 55 standards, was used to monitor the community response to hydrocarbons in the present study. Soil samples.Soil samples C1, C2, and C3 (0.5 to 1 kg) were obtained from depths of 0.9 to 1.2 m in a C5+-contaminated area close to an existing polyethylene plant in Alberta, Canada. Benzene, toluene, xylene, styrene, dicyclopentadiene (DCPD), and naphthalene were all detected in this soil. Samples U1, U2, and U3, consisting of 1 to 2 kg of uncontaminated sediment, were obtained from different locations at the same site. Sample U1 consisted of clay till and sandy material taken from a depth of 12.0 to 12.5 m. Sample U2 consisted of sandy material taken from a depth of 12.5 m. Sample U3 was a composite of wet clay material taken from a depth of 5.5 m and sandy material collected at a depth of 14 m from the same borehole. Uncontaminated sediment samples U1 and U3 were taken from new boreholes made beyond the edges of a known C5+ contaminant plume. Uncontaminated sediment sample U2 was taken from a location where a new ethylene plant was under construction. 