(10) demonstrated that p-xylene was cometabolically removed by benzene and toluene degraders. The presence of p-xylene decreased the rates of degradation of these primary substrates. Similarly, Deeb and Alvarez-Cohen (1) found that the rates of degradation of BTEX compounds in mixtures were lower than rates of degradation of the pure compounds. Also, the order of degradation of compounds in mixtures was different than the order of degradation of the pure compounds. The presence of o-xylene enhanced benzene and toluene removal, but the latter two compounds inhibited removal of xylene. We determined the degradation kinetics only for the C5+ components present in the mixture, as exposure to pure components is unlikely to occur at sites where this mixture is generated. Benzene is the main component of C5+ (45%, wt/wt), followed by poorly degradable DCPD and cyclopentadiene (20%, wt/wt). Toluene, styrene, xylenes, and naphthalene, the other components that we monitored, are present at much smaller concentrations (6, 3, 2, and 2% [wt/wt], respectively). A large number of the standards isolated (31 of the 44 standards tested) were capable of benzene degradation, whereas degradation of the minor C5+ components was less widespread (Table 1). The main community members identified in enrichment cultures (Fig. 2) are all capable of benzene degradation (Table 1). The degradation curves for all C5+ components suggested that there was an acclimation period (lag time), followed by degradation (9). The lag time may involve adaptation to the C5+ concentration used in the degradation experiments; hydrocarbon degradation genes should have been induced in the inocula, which were all grown in desiccators with 1% C5+ in vpo as the sole carbon and energy source. Despite its much higher concentration, benzene was generally removed first, due to a shorter lag time and/or a higher first-order rate constant than those observed for the other degradable C5+ components (Table 2). This was true for enrichment cultures derived from contaminated and uncontaminated soils and for synthetic consortia. Inhibition of xylene removal by benzene, as described by Deeb and Alvarez-Cohen (1), may have contributed to the slower removal of xylene by some of our cultures. The fact that the benzene concentration was highest and the benzene supply was unlimited during growth of enrichments or synthetic consortia on 1% C5+ in vpo in the desiccators prior to the rate studies may have forced the communities to make benzene removal a priority, because benzene metabolism can reduce its toxicity (15). The communities at field sites contaminated with C5+ may be similarly adapted to benzene removal. Our enrichment studies suggest that a variety of communities with different compositions are able to metabolize the benzene-dominated C5+ mixture (Fig. 2). Hence, just as communities with different compositions have been shown to effectively degrade Solvesso 100 (17), our results indicate that a variety of communities with different compositions are active in C5+ degradation. A single community structure that is effective in C5+ degradation therefore cannot be defined. 