The headspace in the bottles was minimized to reduce contamination with air. Physical and chemical characteristics of the groundwater (oxidation/reduction potential [ORP], dissolved oxygen concentration [DO], pH, and temperature) were determined as described elsewhere (49) immediately after sampling. SIP.Groundwater samples were manipulated in an anaerobic glove box filled with reduced-copper-treated nitrogen gas. An electron acceptor (NaNO3 or Na2SO4) was added to the groundwater at a final concentration of 5 mM from a sterile anaerobic stock solution. Inorganic nutrients (NH4Cl and K2HPO4) were also added from sterile anaerobic stock solutions to final concentrations of 1.0 mg liter−1 and 0.2 mg liter−1, respectively. After the bottles were supplemented with 200 μM [13C6]benzene (Cambridge Isotope Laboratories), they were incubated at 25°C in the dark without shaking. For aerobic incubation of the groundwater, 300 ml of groundwater sample was dispensed into a glass bottle (1-liter capacity), and the headspace was filled with air as the source of oxygen. The inorganic nutrients and [13C6]benzene were added as described above. Sterile controls were prepared under the same conditions by autoclaving the bottles for 20 min at 121°C twice before adding [13C6]benzene. RNA extraction, ultracentrifugation, and fractionation.Microbial cells in the groundwater sample were collected on a GV membrane (0.22-μm pore size; Millipore) by vacuum filtration. Total RNA was extracted using a FastRNA Blue kit (Qbiogene) and an RNeasy mini kit (QIAGEN) as described elsewhere (37). RNA purity and quantity were determined by measuring the UV absorption spectrum (46). 13C-labeled RNA and unlabeled RNA were separated by equilibrium density gradient centrifugation and gradient fractionation (37). Total RNA (500 ng) was loaded onto a cesium trifluoroacetate gradient and centrifuged at 64,000 rpm for 36 h at 20°C. Gradients were fractionated from the bottom by displacement with water from the top by using a high-performance liquid chromatography pump at a flow rate of 0.2 ml min−1. The buoyant densities of gradient fractions were determined by weighing specific volumes. RNAs were isolated from gradient fractions by precipitation with 1 volume of isopropyl alcohol and were checked by electrophoresis of agarose gels as described previously (37). 16S rRNA amplification and DGGE analysis.RNA samples from the equilibrium density gradient fractions were reverse transcribed using the reverse primer 518R (38) and avian myeloblastosis virus reverse transcriptase (Takara). The cDNAs produced were used to amplify the V3 regions of bacterial 16S rRNA genes (corresponding to positions 341 to 534 in the Escherichia coli rRNA sequence) connected to a GC clamp, using PCR primers 357F and 518R (38). PCR was performed as described previously (55), and amplification of PCR products with the expected sizes was confirmed by electrophoresis through 1.5% (wt/vol) agarose gels (LO3; Takara) in Tris-borate-EDTA buffer (46). Denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis (DGGE) was performed with a DCode instrument (Bio-Rad) as described previously (25). Three independent PCR/DGGE analyses were performed for each sample to verify the reproducibility of the method. DGGE profile images were obtained and analyzed using Gel Doc 2000 (Bio-Rad) and Multi-Analyst software (version 1.0.2 for Apple Power PC; Bio-Rad). Nucleotide sequences of DGGE bands were determined as described previously (55). Sequence homology searches were conducted using the GenBank nucleotide sequence library and the BLAST program (3) through the National Center for Biotechnology Information website (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/BLAST). Isolation and phylogenetic characterization of bacterial strains.The groundwater sample incubated with [13C6]benzene under denitrifying conditions was spread onto agar plates containing diluted CGY medium (dCGY medium, containing 0.05% Bacto Casamino Acids, 0.01% Bacto yeast extract, 0.05% glycerol, and 1.5% agar) and incubated aerobically at 25°C. The sample was also spread onto dCGY plates containing 2 mM NaNO3 and incubated anaerobically under an atmosphere of nitrogen at 25°C. Colonies formed on the plates were purified by restreaking on dCGY plates and aerobic or anaerobic incubation. Purified bacterial strains were grown aerobically in 30 ml of dCGY medium, and genomic DNAs were extracted by using a genomic DNA purification kit (Promega) in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions. 