Similarly, lab-scale aerobic activated sludge wastewater treatment plants were found to be able to eliminate monoand dichlorobenzene but not 1,2,4-trichlorobenzene (Weber-Jr et al. 1987). Pseudomonas strains which were isolated in chlorobenzene enrichment cultures were able to mineralize dichlorobenzenes and 1,2,4- trichlorobenzene. One strain was even able to metabolize 1,2,4,5-tetrachlorobenzene, but higher chlorinated benzenes were left unutilized (Sander et al. 1991). These results indicate that penta- and hexachlorobenzene are definitely not biodegraded in aerobic environ- ments. The biodegradation of tetra- and trichlorobenzene may occur but it is certainly not reliable. On the other hand, mono- and dichlorobenzenes are readily degraded by aerobic bacteria (Schraa et al. 1986). Polychlorinated biphenyls (PCB) show a similar aerobic biodegradability pattern as chlorobenzenes. Experiments in which PCB contaminated sediments are incubated aerobically, have shown that congeners containing 3 or more chloro groups are not removed while the mono- and dichlorinated biphenyls are eliminated (Anid et al. 1991). The biodegradability of different PCB mixtures in aerobic activated sludge was shown to be inversely related to their average chlorine number (Tucker et al. 1975), as is shown in Fig. 3. It was concluded that mono- and dichlorinated congeners were readily biodegradable while those with 5 or more chlorines were completely recalcitrant. Several attempts have been made to isolate aerobic bacteria which can degrade higher chlorinated biphenyls. Acinetobacter sp. strain P6 could degrade congeners with up to 4 chloro groups but pentachlorinated biphenyl was persistent (Furukawa et al. 1981). An Alcaligenes strain which utilized dichlorinated biphenyls respired tri- and tetrachlorobiphenyls only slightly faster than the respiration of background endogenous substrate (Yagi & Sudo 1980). The best results so far have been obtained with Alcaligenes eutrophus which was able to degrade at least some congeners with up to 6 chlorine groups but not higher (Bedard et al. 1987). Nonetheless, the results obtained in natural mixed cultures in the environment and wastewater treatment plants indicate that only mono- and dichlorinated biphenyls can be expected to be reliably removed under aerobic conditions. Little is known about the fate of dioxins in natural microbial communities. In one study, the aerobic chloroaromatic hydrocarbon-degrading Alcaligenes sp. strain JB 1 was unable to degrade tetrachlorodibenzo[p]dioxin but was able to degrade lower chlorinated dioxins (Parsons 1992). Several other aerobic bacteria have also been reported that are able to metabolize monochlorinated dioxins but there are no reports indicating aerobic biodegradation of polychlorinated dioxins. These observations serve as an indication that the same pattern of biodegradability may apply to dioxins as to chlorobenzenes and PCB's. 