Finally, 1,1,1-trichloro-2,2'-bis(p-chlorophenyl)ethane (DDT) and the related methoxychlor 1,1,1-trichloro- 2,2'-bis(p-methoxyphenyl)ethane are typical examples of halogenated aromatic hydrocarbon pesticides which are recalcitrant to biodegradation under aerobic condi- tions. These compounds have been shown to persist in aerobic incubations with soils (Fogel et al. 1982; Guenzi & Beard 1968) and in a BOD test (Subba-Rao & Alexander 1977). Lower chlorinated diphenylethane or diphenylmethane derivatives in turn were shown to be biodegraded by the aerobic bacterium Alcaligenes sp. strain IsoDPM4 (Beunick & Rehm 1988) and they were also respired during a BOD test (Subba-Rao & Alexander 1977). Polychlorinated phenols, in contrast to the aromatic hydrocarbons, do seem to be degraded at rapid rates by enrichment cultures or isolated strains (Puhakka & Jarvinen 1992; Valo et al. 1990). However, in complex wastewater matrices such as bleaching effluents the removal of polychlorinated phenols has generally been troublesome, although lower chlorinated phenols are more readily removed (Leuenberger et al. 1985; Salkinoja-Salonen et al. 1984). Similarly poor biodegradation of pentachlorophenol (PCP) has been observed during aerobic soil bioremediation experiments with the indigenous microflora (Briglia et al. 1994; Mikesell & Boyd 1988). Better results under aerobic conditions were obtained by bioaugmentation with a Rhodococcus PCP degrading bacterial strain (Briglia et al. 1994). Chlorinated lignin fragments are responsible for most of the adsorbable organic halogens (AOX) in bleaching effluents. The partial removal of AOX during aerobic wastewater treatment of bleaching effluents has generally been found to be low (Ferguson 1994; Jokela et al. 1993). Anaerobes. In contrast to the oxygenolytic approach of aerobes, anaerobic microorganisms are able to reductively dechlorinate polychlorinated aromatic hydrocarbons (Haggblom 1992; Mohn & Tiedje 1992). The highly electrophilic character of the multiple chlorine substitutions increases the favorableness of this type of nucleophilic attack (Dolfing & Harrison 1993). Anaerobic enrichment cultures were able to dechlorinate hexa- and pentachlorobenzene 2 to 3 times faster than tetra- and trichlorobenzenes (Holliger et al. 1992). In many cases, the reductive dechlorination can also be carried out abiotically with reduced metal cofactors (e.g. vitamin B12 and factor F430) of important enzymes involved in anaerobic metabolism (Wackett & Schanke 1992). Reductive dehalogenation of polychlorinated aromatic hydrocarbons does not result in the mineralization of these compounds. Instead, lower chlorinated analogues which are less readily reduced are the anaerobically recalcitrant end products of this biotransformation. In contrast to the hydrocarbons, the di- and monochlorinated phenols, which often accumulate from the reductive dehalogenation of polychlorinated phenols, have in some cases been shown to undergo further metabolism to mineralized products. While hexachlorobenzene is completely recalcitrant in aerobic conditions, this compound is readily dechlorinated by anaerobic methanogenic consortia present in aquifer, lake and river sediments (Bosma et al. 1994) as well as in anaerobically incubated soil (Ramanand et al. 