The obvious solution of providing a sequenced treatment system has been studied with hexachlorobenzene, polychlorihated biphenyls, DDT and methoxychlor (Table 4). The importance of the anaerobic pretreatment step in enabling the subsequent aerobic mineralization of these recalcitrant pollutants was best illustrated in one study with methoxychlor (Fogel et al. 1982). When incubated only in either aerobic or anaerobic soils, no mineralization was found. Mineralization was only observed under aerobic conditions which succeeded an anaerobic pretreatment step. Aromatic amines that are produced by the facile anaerobic reduction of aerobically persistent nitroaromatics or aerobically recalcitrant azo bonds are seldom subject to further degradation under anaerobic conditions. Aniline, the simplest aromatic amine, can be regarded as being totally recalcitrant in methanogenic consortia; however, this compound is readily degraded in aerobic environments. Several investigators have demonstrated the complete mineralization or elimination of nitroaromatics and azo dyes in sequenced anaerobic and aerobic steps (Table 4). During the continuous treatment of wastewaters containing azo-dyes, the anaerobic step provided nearly complete decolorization of the dye components (97%) and about 60% elimination of the COD. Afterwards, the aerobic post treatment allowed an additional COD elimination of 30% (Jianrong et al. 1994). The extra COD removal was most likely attributable to the poorly anaerobically degradable aromatic amines derived from dye reduction. If the dye wastewater was treated directly by the aerobic step, incomplete decolorization occurred (Zaoyan et al. 1992). The high tendency of certain compounds to undergo oxidative coupling in aerobic environments can be regarded as undesirable if the goal of the biotreatment system is to mineralize the pollutants. The humic-like polymers formed from polyhydroxylated phenols and chlorophenols as well as nitroaromatics and aromatic amines, are highly recalcitrant to further biodegradation. The initial oligomeric intermediates of these coupling reactions are often unwanted mutagenic and carcinogenic compounds such as dioxins and nitroazoxy-aromatics from chlorophenols and nitroaromatics, respectively. However, humic products of extensive polymerization were shown to be non-toxic. Polymerization of aromatic compounds into humus can even be considered as a means of detoxifying pollution (Bollag et al. 1988; Field & Lettinga 1991; Klibanov Humus may very well represent safe end products of natural aromatic pollution in the ecology. Naturally produced chloroaromatics are hypothesized to be incorporated into humus (De Jong et al. 1994), accounting for the high background levels of AOX in soil organic matter (Asplund & Grimvall 1991). Humus collected from pristine environments was shown to contain chloroaromatic units (Dahlman et al. 1993). The formation of toxic intermediates and recalcitrant humus polymers can often be avoided by choosing anaerobic conditions for biological treatment. This approach is valid as long as the pollutants are sufficiently degraded under anaerobic conditions to non-reactive intermediates or mineralized end products. However at the other extreme, partial biotransformations occurring during anaerobic pretreatment can sometimes prepare aromatic compounds for enhanced polymerization in subsequent aerobic exposure. The demethylation of chloroanisoles and chloroveratroles under anaerobic conditions produces chlorophenols (Haggblom et al~ 1993; Neilson et al. 1987). 