Concomitantly, microorganisms in the aerobic zones of the biofilm can be used to mineralize the reduced products, enabling the benefits of sequenced anaerobic-aerobic treatment in one bioreactor. Three examples are reported in the literature where the recalcitrant behaviour of aromatic pollutants was overcome in cocultures constructed from anaerobic and aerobic bacteria. In the first study, an anaerobic-aerobic coculture was applied to the degradation of a mixture of DDT and 4,4'-dichlorodiphenylmethane (DDM) (Beunick & Rehm 1988). A DDT dechlorinating bacterium, Enterobacter cloacae, isolated from digested sewage sludge was coimmobilized into calcium alginate beads together withAlcaligenes sp. strain Iso DPM4, an obligate aerobic bacterium that was able to cometabolize DDM with diphenylmethane as a primary substrate. The coculture placed into an aerated fermentor where the bulk liquid phase dissolved oxygen concentration ranged from 2.4 to 8 mg L -1, was able to simultaneously dechlorinate DDT and mineralize DDM. That dechlorination was possible under the aerobic conditions prevailing, was attributed to anaerobic microniches in the centre of the gel beads. In the second study, a similar coculture was constructed in calcium alginate beads for the biodegradation of 4-chloro-2-nitrophenol (4C2NP) (Beunink & Rehm 1990). E. cloacae was able to reduce 4C2NP to 4-chloro-2-aminophenol (4C2AP) and 4-chloro-2- acetaminophenol (4C2AAP) in anaerobic conditions. The obligate aerobe, Alcaligenes sp. strain TK2, was able to mineralize 4C2AP in aerobic conditions. While E. cloacae was unable to metabolize 4C2AP in either aerobic or anaerobic conditions and Alcaligenes sp. strain TK2 was unable to metabolize 4C2NP, the coculture immobilized in 3 mm diameter beads and placed in a well aerated airlift reactor was able to mineralize 4C2NP completely to CO2, C1- and NH4 +. The distribution of each microorganism in the gel indicated that E. cloacae was present in the anaerobic core of the beads, while Alcaligenes was located in the aerobic outer periphery. Thus the complete mineralization can be rationalized by the migration of 4C2NP into the anaerobic zone and subsequent migration of 4C2AP and 4C2AAP to the aerobic zone. The importance of a thick bead diameter on the creation of anaerobic zones was illustrated by the lack of 4C2NP reduction in cocultures immobilized in small 1 mm diameter beads. In the third study, an anaerobic enrichment culture derived from fresh water sediments, which was able to dechlorinate 2,3,6-trichlorobenzoic acid (236TCBc) to 2,5-dichlorobenzoic acid (25DCBc), was immobilized on a vermiculite support during continuous operation (Gerritse & Gottschal 1992). A 25DCBc mineralizing obligate aerobe, Pseudomonas aeruginosa was also introduced into the reactor. While the anaerobic enrichment culture alone was not able to further metabolize 25DCBc and while P. aeruginosa in pure culture was not able to degrade 236TCBc, the aerated coculture was able to completely mineralize 236TCBc, with 95% recovery oforganochlorine as CI-. Reductive dechlorination of 236TCBc to 25DCBc apparently occurred in the immobilized biomass where anaerobic zones were most likely established. The further mineralization of 25DCBc was most likely carried out by the free suspended cells of P aeruginosa in the bulk liquid phase. The dissolved oxygen concentration in the reactor bulk liquid ranged from 0.013 to 0.03 mg L -I . Anaerobic and aerobic metabolic activities are a prerequisite for the complete biodegradation of recalcitrant aromatic pollutants which contain electronwithdrawing substituents. While aromatic pollutants with chloro, nitro and azo substituents are often recalcitrant or troublesome for oxygenolytic attack by aerobes, these substituents are readily reduced by both anaerobic microorganisms and by resting cells of aerobic microorganisms incubated anaerobically. In turn, the reduced products, such as lower chlorinated aromatics or aromatic amines, are persistent to further anaerobic degradation. However, they are readily mineralized by bacteria under aerobic conditions. Environmental biotechnology should therefore attempt to provide both anaerobic and aerobic environments in order to promote the mineralization of these xenobiotic pollutants. The anaerobic and aerobic environments can be provided in sequenced reactors. However since anaerobic microniches are easily established in aerated biofilms, the best of both worlds can be obtained in a single bioreactor. 