A mastermix of multiple displacement amplification (MDA) reagents minus the Syto 13 sufficient for a 96-well plate was ultraviolet-treated for 60 min for decontamination. Syto 13 was then added to the mastermix, which was added to the single cells for real-time MDA on the Roche LightCycler 480 for 17 h at 30 °C. All steps of single-cell handling and amplification were performed under most stringent conditions to reduce the introduction of contamination. Single-cell MDA products were screened using Sanger sequencing of 16S rRNA gene amplicons derived from each MDA product. A total of 16 Oceanospirillales cells were obtained. Three single-amplified genomes were identified as being 95% similar to the dominant Oceanospirillales OTU, and of high sequence quality (16S rRNA gene) and pursued for whole-genome sequencing. Single-cell Illumina sequencing, quality control and assembly Single-cell amplified DNA of three Oceanospirillales cells was used to generate normalized, indexed Illumina libraries. Briefly, 3 μg of MDA product was sheared in 100 μl using the Covaris E210 (Covaris) with the setting of 10% duty cycle, intensity 5 and 200 cycle per burst for 6 min per sample and the fragmented DNA purified using QIAquick columns (Qiagen) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The sheared DNA was end-repaired, A-tailed and ligated to the Illumina adaptors according to the Illumina standard paired-end protocol. The ligation product was purified using AMPure SPRI beads, then underwent normalization using the Duplex-Specific Nuclease Kit (Axxora, San Diego, CA, USA). The normalized libraries were then amplified by PCR for 12 cycles using a set of two indexed primers and the library pool was sequenced using an Illumina GAIIx sequencer according to the manufacturer’s protocols (run mode 2 × 150 bp). Approximately 2.5 Gb (16 797 846 reads) of sequence data was collected from the Oceanospirillales single-cell genomes. The Illumina single-amplified genome data was quality controlled using GC content and blast analysis and no contamination was detectable in two of the single-amplified genomes, whereas the third single-amplified genome was excluded from the analysis due to the presence of contaminating sequences. Reads from these two single cells were assembled using Velvet (Zerbino and Birney, 2008). To estimate genome-sequence completeness, the annotated, assembled draft genome data was compared with core COGs for Proteobacteria and Gammaproteobacteria (number of identified core COGs/number of expected core COGs). Mapping and analysis Unassembled metatranscriptomic reads were mapped to the Oceanospirillales single-cell draft genome using the CLC Genomics Workbench (CLC bio), using the following parameters: mismatch cost 2, insertions cost 3, deletion cost 3, length fraction 0.5 and similarity 0.8. Assembled single-cell data was annotated using CAMERA (v2.0.6.2) (Seshadri et al., 2007). The Interactive Pathways Explorer v2 (Letunic et al., 2008) was used to map the assembled, annotated metatranscriptome with an assembled, annotated Oceanospirillales single-cell draft genome. Clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeat regions were identified in the draft genome using CRISPRFinder (Grissa et al., 2007). Cell counts Cell counts were carried out as described in Hazen et al. (2010). Briefly, samples were preserved in 4% formaldehyde and stored at 4 °C until the time of analysis. Filtered cells were stained with Acridine Orange and imaged with a Zeiss Axioskop (Carl Zeiss, Inc., Oberkochen, Germany) microscope. Infrared spectromicroscopy and data processing Synchrotron radiation-based Fourier-transform infrared measurements and analyses were conducted at the infrared beamline of the Advanced Light Source (http://infrared.als.lbl.gov/) on thin layers of fresh samples. Samples consisted of 25 ml of seawater from the proximal plume station. A total of 10 subsamples were randomly collected using a glass pipette. Samples were placed between a gold-coated Si wafer and a SiNx window. Photons emitted over a mid-infrared wavenumber range of 4000 to 650 cm−1 were focused through the samples by the Nicolet Nic-Plan IR microscope (with a numerical aperture objective of 0.65), which was coupled to a Nicolet Magna 760 FTIR bench (Thermo Scientific Inc., Waltham, MA, USA). The entire view-field was 200 × 150 μm2, which was typically divided into equal-sized 2 × 2 μm2 squares before raster scanning. 