Genes coding for degradation of simple and PAH aromatics were either expressed at low levels or not at all (Figure 4). Reddy et al. (2012) determined the composition of oil and gas that was emitted from the Macondo well and reported that BTEX compounds were the most abundant hydrocarbons larger than C1–C5 in the plume. However, our findings indicate that of the BTEX compounds, only those genes coding for ethylbenzene degradation were expressed, and only in the proximal plume sample (Figure 4). This finding suggests that the more recalcitrant compounds were not being actively degraded at the time when we sampled. Although the samples analyzed by Reddy et al. (2012) were collected at later time points than ours (mid to late June), their findings of negligible biodegradation of BTEX compounds over 4 days in the deep-sea plume are consistent with our findings. Figure 4. Figure 4 - Unfortunately we are unable to provide accessible alternative text for this. If you require assistance to access this image, please contact help@nature.com or the author Analysis of genes involved in hydrocarbon degradation in the metatranscriptome data. Blue bars denote the distal station metatranscriptome and red bars denote the proximal station metatranscriptome. Raw, unassembled metatranscriptome reads were compared with proteins involved in hydrocarbon degradation, using a custom database using the tblastn algorithm. A bit score cutoff of greater than or equal to40 was used. Genes were grouped according to function. An asterisk indicates that the difference in relative abundance of a particular gene group in the proximal station metatranscriptome compared with the distal station metatranscriptome was statistically significant. Gene categories denoted with an ‘‡’ indicate a similar substrate degradation pathway in which the different substrates are degraded by the same enzyme (simple ring oxygenases). Within this category, ring cleavage/hydroxylating enzymes were observed at very low abundance and only in the proximal plume station. Simple ring oxygenases that are involved in the degradation of benzene, toluene and PAHs were not observed in the metatranscriptome data. A complete list of all gene categories is provided in Supplementary Table S6. Full figure and legend (79K) Our study also revealed that a diversity of particulate methane monooxygenase (Pmo) genes, but no detectable soluble methane monooxygenases, were expressed in the plume and at higher levels with distance from the wellhead and over time (that is, 1.5–3 days to reach the distal station). Although pmo genes were expressed in the oil plume, their relative levels were still less than those for genes coding for alkane degradation (Figure 4). These results were surprising, given that methane was the most abundant hydrocarbon released during the spill (Kessler et al., 2011) with concentrations ranging 20–50-fold higher than background levels (Valentine et al., 2010 and references therein). Our data, as well as those of Valentine et al. (2010) and Kessler et al. (2011), suggested a lag time in the response of methanotrophs to the plume, relative to the initial bloom of Oceanospirillales capable of oxidation of alkanes. However, our findings suggest that methane oxidation was actively occurring in the plume samples presented here, which is earlier in the spill history than has previously been suggested (Valentine et al., 2010; Kessler et al., 2011). Because of the dominance of members of the Oceanospirillales in the plume samples and the recalcitrant nature of members of this order to cultivation, we specifically targeted this group for single-cell genome sequencing. We sorted water collected from the proximal plume station by fluorescence-activated cell sorting. The single cells were lysed and genomic DNA was amplified using MDA. 