Unfortunately we are unable to provide accessible alternative text for this. If you require assistance to access this image, please contact help@nature.com or the author The normalized signal intensity of bbs (β-oxidation of benzylsuccinate) genes for anaerobic toluene degradation. The signal intensity for each sequence was the average of the total signal intensity from all the replicates. Gene number is the protein ID number for each gene as listed in the GenBank database. All data are presented as mean±s.e. ***P<0.01, **P<0.05, *P<0.1. In total, seven probes were designed for bbs genes in GeoChip 4.0 and three probes were detected in the samples. Shifts of the genes involved in key biogeochemical cycling processes Carbon Among the carbon cycling genes detected, 798 genes involved in the degradation of complex carbon compounds, such as starch, hemicellulose, cellulose, chitin, lignin and aromatics, showed positive hybridization signals. Most of these genes (for example, pulA, xylA, xynA, lip, limEH and vanA) showed significantly (P<0.05) higher abundance in plume than in non-plume samples (Supplementary Figure S4). These types of genes could also be important in degradation of various oil components and their intermediates. In this study, 9–14 mcrA genes encoding the α subunit of methyl coenzyme M reductase and 5–8 pmoA genes for methane monooxygenase were detected in the plume samples. Specifically, mcrA genes from Methanococcus aeolicus Nankai-3, Methanoculleus marisnigri JR1 and Methanocorpusculum labreanum Z were detected in all of the oil plume samples, but most of them were from uncultured microorganisms. Significantly (P<0.05) higher signal intensities were observed for mcrA in the plume than in the non-plume samples (Supplementary Figure S5). However, no significant differences were found for pmoA and mmoX (particulate methane monooxygenase) between plume and non-plume samples. Nitrogen Petroleum generally contains about 0.1–2% nitrogen, and given the large quantities of oil involved, it may act as an N pool in this ecosystem. Interestingly, nasA (nitrate reductase) and nir (nitrite reductase) for assimilatory N reduction, and gdh (glutamate dehydrogenase) for ammonia assimilation exhibited significantly (P<0.05 or 0.01) higher signal intensities in plume samples (Figure 6). The observed stimulation of N assimilation processes could be due to an increase of microbial biomass (Hazen et al, 2010). However, no significant differences were observed for other N-cycling genes, for example, nitrification, denitrification and N fixation (Figure 6). Figure 6. Figure 6 - Unfortunately we are unable to provide accessible alternative text for this. If you require assistance to access this image, please contact help@nature.com or the author The relative changes of the detected genes involved in the N cycle in oil plume. The signal intensity for each gene detected was normalized by all detected gene sequences using the mean. The percentage of a functional gene in a bracket was the sum of signal intensity of all detected sequences of this gene divided by the grand sum of signal intensity of the detected N cycle genes, and weighted by the fold change of the signal intensity of this gene in plume to that in non-plume. For each functional gene, red indicates that this gene had a higher signal intensity in plume than in non-plume and their significance was indicated with two stars (**) at P<0.01, whereas blue indicates that this gene had a lower signal intensity in oil-plume than in non-plume. Grey-colored genes were not targeted by this GeoChip, or not detected in those samples. It remains unknown if nosZ homologs exist in nitrifiers. Description of the genes: (a) gdh, encoding glutamate dehydrogenase, ureC, encoding urease responsible for ammonification; (b) nasA, encoding nitrate reductase, NiR, encoding nitrite reductase, responsible for assimilatory N reduction; (c) nifH, encoding nitrogenase responsible for N2 fixation; (d) narG encoding nitrate reductase, nirS and nirK-D (with denitrification activity), encoding nitrite reductase; nosZ, encoding nitrous oxide reductase, norB, encoding nitric oxide reducatse, responsible for denitrification (e) napA, encoding periplasmic nitrate reductase, nrfA, encoding c-type cytochrome nitrite reducatse, responsible for dissimilatory N reduction to ammonium; (f) hao, encoding hydroxylamine oxidoreductase, and nirK-N encoding nitrite reductase for nitrifiers (an indication of nitrification activity), responsible for nitrification. Sulfur Sulfite reduction genes were highly abundant in the deep-sea plume: 81–102 dsrA/B genes for dissimilatory sulfite reductase, and 8–12 AprA genes for dissimilatory adenosine-5′-phosphosulfate reductase were detected with significantly (P<0.05) higher abundance in the plume than in non-plume samples (Supplementary Figure S6). Microbial populations similar to Alkalilimnicola ehrlichei MLHE-1, Chlorobium ferrooxidans DSM 13031, Clostridium leptum DSM 753, Desulfomicrobium thermophilum, Pyrobaculum calidifontis JCM 11548, Thermodesulforhabdus norvegica, Magnetococcus sp. 