This review summarizes the current knowledge about the organisms involved in anaerobic benzene degradation and the possible mechanisms by which the benzene ring is activated and transformed in the absence of oxygen, including innovative experimental results published by different research groups in the last 5 years. The reader may find additional information regarding anaerobic benzene degradation also in previously released excellent reviews (Lovley, 2000; Coates et al., 2002; Foght, 2008; Weelink et al., 2010). Benzene degradation in laboratory microcosms – electron acceptors and ‘key players’ Benzene-mineralizing laboratory microcosms have been established under several electron-acceptor conditions; in most cases, successful enrichments of anaerobic benzene degraders were established by using anoxic sediment or soil taken from petroleum contaminated sites (for an overview see Table 1). The major part of microorganisms living in the subsurface are attached to sediment or soil particles (Harvey et al., 1984; Kölbel-Boelke et al., 1988; Hazen et al., 1991; Alfreider et al., 1997; Griebler et al., 2002; Anneser et al., 2010). Correspondingly, microcosms prepared from sediment usually show higher degradation rates and shorter lag-phases compared with microcosms prepared from groundwater (Holm et al., 1992). For most of the enrichment cultures, however, long lag-phases (sometimes more than 100 days) were observed before anaerobic benzene degradation was detectable. Initial degradation rates were low, indicating that the specific rate of anaerobic benzene degradation is generally rather low. Nevertheless, long lag-phases and low degradation rates seem to be not the only reasons for the limited number of anaerobic benzene-degrading cultures successfully enriched so far. On the one hand, several authors observed that anaerobic benzene degraders could not be detected at all at distinct sites (e.g. Langenhoff et al., 1996; Kazumi et al., 1997; Nales et al., 1998; Weiner and Lovley, 1998a; Phelps and Young, 1999), indicating that anaerobic benzene degraders may not be ubiquitous. On the other hand, it has been shown that the majority of bacteria cannot be cultured in the laboratory yet (Rappe and Giovannoni, 2003; Keller and Zengler, 2004). These yet uncultured organisms might include anaerobic benzene degraders. Possibly, ‘not detected’ means ‘beyond the detection limit’ in some cases. In our laboratory, we have set up anaerobic enrichment cultures from different contaminated sites with 13C-labelled benzene as substrate, and observed in some (but not all) cultures a small but continuous release of 13C-CO2, demonstrating that benzene is mineralized in those cultures, but for long incubation times only detectable for highly sensitive gas chromatographic isotope ratio mass spectrometers (Carsten Vogt, unpubl. results). Similar results were obtained by Morasch and colleagues (2007). Interestingly, the growth behaviour of benzene-degrading cultures seems to be not correlated to the amount of potential energy available by the electron acceptor. The biomass yields of benzene-degrading nitrate-reducing pure and enrichment cultures were reported to be low and comparable to the yield of methanogenic benzene-degrading enrichment cultures (Coates et al., 2001; Ulrich and Edwards, 2003). This is surprising as the standard free energy for benzene mineralization with nitrate or ferric iron as electron acceptor is more than an order of magnitude higher compared with the acceptors sulfate and carbon dioxide (Table 2). At some sites, enrichment cultures could be established using different electron acceptors [e.g. Ponca City, USA: ferric iron (Caldwell et al., 1999; Caldwell and Suflita, 2000), sulfate (Anderson and Lovley, 2000), carbon dioxide (Weiner and Lovley, 1998a); Toronto Gas Station: nitrate, sulfate, carbon dioxide (Nales et al., 1998; Ulrich and Edwards, 2003)]. A few cultures were also described to switch from sulfate to carbon dioxide as electron acceptor and vice versa (Ulrich and Edwards, 2003). The latter examples support the hypothesis of syntrophic processes governing anaerobic benzene degradation, which are discussed in more detail below. Benzene degradation under methanogenic conditions Benzene degradation under methanogenic conditions was occasionally observed in laboratory microcosms (Wilson et al., 1986; Grbic-Galic and Vogel, 1987; Kazumi et al., 1997; Nales et al., 1998; Weiner and Lovley, 1998b; Ulrich and Edwards, 2003; Chang et al., 2005; Sakai et al., 2009), but also verified in situ by means of push-pull experiments (Reinhard et al., 2005). The first demonstration of anaerobic benzene mineralization was reported by Grbic-Galic and Vogel (1987) who detected a small production (less than 10%) of 14C-CO2 from ring-labelled 14C-benzene in a methanogenic culture which was originally prepared from sewage sludge and pre-enriched with ferulic acid as substrate. Complete mineralization of benzene to equal amounts of carbon dioxide and methane was shown later in microcosms set up with sediment samples taken from a benzene-contaminated aquifer and using 14C-labelled benzene as substrate (Weiner and Lovley, 1998b). Added acetate (1 mM) or propionate (100 µM) strongly inhibited benzene mineralization, indicating that these compounds were fermentatively produced during benzene degradation. Two cultures initially enriched with sulfate as electron acceptor could switch to carbon dioxide; notably, degradation rates were significantly higher under methanogenic conditions (Ulrich and Edwards, 2003). In these cultures, phylotypes affiliated to the genera Desulfobacterium and Desulfosporosinus as well as aceticlastic methanogens were identified as dominant members of the community after prolonged incubation with benzene (Ulrich and Edwards, 2003; Da Silva and Alvarez, 2007; Mancini et al., 2008). 