Nutrients in the pore water of shallow submerged sand in the region range from 2 to 10 μmol liter−1 for dissolved inorganic nitrogen, and from 0.1 to 1 μmol liter−1 for dissolved inorganic phosphate and typically are about one order of magnitude higher than the respective nutrient concentrations in the overlying water column (M. Huettel, unpublished data). Samples were collected on 2 July, 30 July, and 1 September 2010. Sample designations were assigned based on collection order, with OS55 through OS320 samples represented in the present study. During each trip, sediment cores of 50 cm in depth were taken in duplicate from the intertidal and supratidal zones. Cores were aseptically sectioned into 10-cm intervals on site, homogenized, and subsampled into sterile 50-ml conical tubes (cores from 2 July 2010 were labeled OS55 to OS77, cores from 30 July 2010 were labeled OS82 to OS91, and cores from 1 September 2010 were labeled OS291 to OS320). During the latter two sampling trips, a 10-by-1-by-1-m trench was excavated perpendicular to the beach face. Samples were taken along the visible oil layer spanning the length of the trench, and vertically through the oil layer (samples from 30 July 2010 were labeled OS200 to OS244; samples from 1 September 2010 were labeled OS248 to OS290). All samples for nucleic acid extraction were immediately frozen on dry ice and stored at −80°C. For cultivation, samples were immediately transported to the lab on ice, stored at 4°C, and processed within a few days. A second control site, unaffected by oil contamination, was sampled at St. George Island, FL (29°44′88.1″N, 084°42′58.6″W) prior to the DH blowout in April 2010. Cores were sampled in triplicate, and the surface 0- to 5-cm interval was archived as described above for further analysis. Source oil was sampled from the DH wellhead and used for chemical analysis and cultivation. This oil was collected on 20 May 2010 aboard the drillship Discoverer Enterprise. Analysis of oil hydrocarbon composition.Oil contamination was assessed by visual examination in the field according to the following scale: 0 for clean or no visible contamination and 1 for low, 2 for medium, and 3 for high levels of oil contamination. A subset of core samples was ultrasonically extracted and subjected to chemical analysis using established, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency-approved, gas chromatography-mass spectrometry (GC-MS) techniques at TestAmerica Laboratories, Tallahassee, FL. Total petroleum hydrocarbons were determined using the Florida residual petroleum organic method (FL-PRO) in core samples, as well as in source oil from the DH wellhead. In addition, more detailed analysis of oil hydrocarbon composition was conducted for the source oil and oiled beach sands visually assessed as containing medium (2) or high (3) levels of oil contamination. Semivolatile organic compounds (polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons, aromatics, aliphatics) were determined by GC-MS method SW846 8270C LL. Enumeration, enrichment, and isolation of oil-degrading bacteria.Oil-degrading bacterial populations were enumerated by the three-tube most-probable-number (MPN) assay using 10-fold serial dilutions of beach sand in growth medium. A minimal, artificial seawater medium was prepared and dispensed according to the method of Widdel and Bak (74). Source oil was sterilized according to the method of Widdel (73) and added as the sole electron donor and carbon source to a final concentration of 0.2% (wt/vol). Under anaerobic conditions, the medium was purged with a 80% N2–20% CO2 gas mixture and sealed into Hungate tubes, and nitrate was provided as the sole electron acceptor to 3 mM. For enumeration under aerobic conditions, the medium was prepared aerobically and dispensed into 16-by-150-mm tubes that were loosely capped and continuously shaken at 150 rpm on a shaker table. The tubes were incubated at room temperature for 1 month, and bacterial growth was monitored by culture turbidity and depletion of added oil at regular intervals compared to autoclaved controls. The MPN index was determined from statistical tables published by the American Public Health Association (3). Strains of oil-degrading bacteria were isolated from the highest positive dilutions of the MPN enrichments, as well as from parallel enrichments conducted in larger volumes of the artificial seawater medium or with filter-sterilized seawater as the enrichment medium. When filtered seawater was used, it was supplemented with vitamin and trace element solutions according to the method of Widdel and Bak (74). In oxic seawater enrichments, the medium was buffered with 10 mM HEPES (pH 7.0) and dispensed into Erlenmeyer flasks, and the flasks were shaken at 150 rpm on a shaker table. Anaerobic seawater enrichments were prepared in serum bottles as described above and sealed with butyl rubber stoppers. 