Isolation, identification, and characterization of model hydrocarbon-degrading bacteria.Evidence from cultivation-based approaches corroborated results from our cultivation-independent molecular-based analyses. We isolated organisms from several well known oil-degrading bacterial genera (Alcanivorax, Marinobacter, Pseudomonas, Acinetobacter, Bacillus, and Microbulbifer) that were detected in abundance in oiled Pensacola Beach sands. All 24 of our isolates were screened initially in minimal media with oil as the sole carbon and electron source, thereby assessing their potential to degrade oil. The majority of strains from oiled Pensacola Beach sands showed high SSU rRNA gene sequence identity to isolates previously cultured from marine or saline habitats that were contaminated with oil hydrocarbons (14, 40, 47, 65, 71). All of these organisms were demonstrated to degrade oil hydrocarbons in pure culture in the present study or by others (14, 40, 47, 65, 71, 76) or were detected in oil-contaminated marine environments (27) (Fig. 3 and Table 5). Bacteria from the genus Alcanivorax and other members of the Gammaproteobacteria isolated in the present study have been demonstrated to degrade alkanes in pure culture (76). Representatives from at least six of the species we isolated (Acinetobacter sp., Bacillus sp., Labrenzia sp., Microbacterium sp., M. hydrocarbonoclasticus, P. pachastrellae, and P. stutzeri) have been linked to PAH degradation in pure culture (27, 40, 67). Although the Vibrio species represented in the present study have not yet been shown to degrade oil in pure culture, some vibrios have been found to metabolize hydrocarbons, including PAHs (24). Our results are in general agreement with previous cultivation studies of these hydrocarbonoclastic taxa. Among the OTU that could be classified to the genus level, Alcanivorax and Marinobacter groups showed the highest relative abundance among known hydrocarbon degraders in our pyrosequence libraries (Table 5) and were well represented among our isolates (Table 4). Marinobacter is a metabolically versatile hydrocarbon-degrading taxon, capable of utilizing a broad range of carbon substrates including aliphatics and PAHs (18, 25). In contrast, the 15 described species of the Alcanivorax group are thought to be highly specialized (50), with A. dieselolei listed as an “obligate hydrocarbonoclastic bacterium” (OHCB) that is capable of utilizing a very narrow range of carbon substrates (76). Our isolate with 100% sequence identity (across 850 bases) with A. dieselolei (AB453732) did show the narrowest range of carbon substrate utilization among the strains we tested (see Results and the supplemental material). The results of the present study and others indicate that the OHCB designation may need to be reconsidered, however, and genome sequencing will be essential to verifying the absence of metabolic pathways. Two different phylotypes of Alcanivorax spp. were abundant in our pyrosequence libraries, and previous work has shown that the physiology of Alcanivorax is likely to be strain specific (27). As with other functional guilds of bacteria, the taxonomy of hydrocarbon degraders is rapidly evolving. Many species have not been validly described. Of those that have been formally described, the phenotype of most strains has been largely characterized using Biolog testing. Biolog tests are effective for range finding and for testing many strains at once, as we have done here. However, these should be considered as preliminary, and they require verification with traditional physiological screening in pure culture. A further understanding of the ecophysiology of hydrocarbon degraders will be crucial to uncovering the in situ controls of oil degradation and to the development of improved mitigation strategies for oil spills. Through the isolation of model organisms, physiological testing of isolates, and genome sequencing, the activity, physiological potential and environmental distribution of hydrocarbon degraders can be confirmed and understood. Conclusions.The quantitative increase in bacterial gene sequences, the increased relative abundance of known oil-degrading taxa, and the isolation of oil-degrading pure cultures from many of the same taxa confirmed the strong selective response of indigenous bacterial communities in Pensacola Beach sands to the presence of oil from the DH oil spill. We hypothesize that Alcanivorax spp. of the Gammaproteobacteria are effective microbial indicators or sentinels of the early stages of oil hydrocarbon degradation in Gulf beach sands when more reactive components such as n-alkanes abound, whereas members of the Alphaproteobacteria (Labrenzia and Rhodobacteraceae) and Gram-positive groups (Bacillus and Microbacterium) may be used as sentinels for the later stages of degradation when more recalcitrant oil hydrocarbon compounds such as PAHs predominate. In addition, we provide a number of pure cultures from these groups that may be used as model organisms to investigate the physiological ecology of hydrocarbon degraders in benthic habitats of the Gulf of Mexico. Further study is needed to delineate the specific role for each of these groups in hydrocarbon degradation on contaminated beaches. 