A survey of soil gases associated with gasoline stations on the Swan Coastal Plain of Western Australia has shown that 20% leak detectable amounts of petroleum. The fates of volatile hydrocarbons in the vadose zone at one contaminated site, and dissolved hydrocarbons in groundwater at another site were followed in a number of studies which are herein reviewed. Geochemical evidence from a plume of hydrocarbon-contaminated groundwater has shown that sulfate reduction rapidly developed as the terminal electron accepting process. Toluene degradation but not benzene degradation was linked to sulfate reduction. The sulfate-reducing bacteria isolated from the plume represented a new species, Desulfosporosinus meridiei. Strains of the species do not mineralise 14C-toluene in pure culture. The addition of large numbers of cells and sulfate to microcosms did stimulate toluene mineralisation but not benzene mineralisation. Attempts to follow populations of sulfate-reducing bacteria by phospholipid signatures, or Desulfosporosinus meridiei by FISH in the plume were unsuccessful, but fluorescently-labeled polyclonal antibodies were successfully used. In the vadose zone at a different site, volatile hydrocarbons were consumed in the top 0.5 m of the soil profile. The fastest measured rate of mineralisation of 14C-benzene in soils collected from the most active zone (6.5 mg kg−1 day−1) could account for the majority of the flux of hydrocarbon vapour towards the surface. The studies concluded that intrinsic remediation by subsurface microbial populations in groundwater on the Swan Coastal Plain can control transport of aromatic hydrocarbon contamination, except for the transport of benzene in groundwater. In the vadose zone, intrinsic remediation by the microbial populations in the soil profile can contain the transport of aromatic hydrocarbons, provided the physical transport of gases, in particular oxygen from the atmosphere, is not impeded by structures. Of all the components of gasoline, some of the most mobile in the environment (i.e., most soluble and volatile), and thus more likely to be transported “off-site” (Figure 1) are among the most hazardous. For example, benzene is relatively soluble in water (1780 mg l−1) and volatile (Henry’s Law constant = 550 Pa m3 mol−1) and is a known carcinogen (Cohen 1996). One guideline “trigger value” for benzene in Australia, the concentration at which some action is required, is 600 µg l−1, although the trigger value may change depending on the nature of the environment or when benzene is in the presence of “other contaminants” (Chapman & Warne 2000). The Swan Coastal Plain of Western Australia, on which the city of Perth is located, has a major refinery and many small gasoline distribution sites. Significant hydrocarbon contamination occurs at the refinery and in a survey of gasoline station sites, 20% showed signs of aromatic hydrocarbon leakage to groundwater (Barber et al. 1991). The fate of dissolved and volatile hydrocarbons in groundwaters and soils in the vicinity of Perth, on the Swan Coastal Plain, have been studied because of the potential environmental and health risks associated with gasoline contamination. Because of the extent of contamination, intrinsic Spillage of gasoline in the environment usually results in transport of the majority of the contamination to the surface of the groundwater where it floats as a “light non-aqueous phase liquid” (LNAPL). The most toxic components of the gasoline, the aromatic hydrocarbons, follow one of two routes. They either slowly dissolve in the groundwater, and move in solution in the direction of groundwater flow, or they volatilise from the LNAPL and the groundwater into the gas phase in the vadose zone (Figure 1). As the contamination essentially moves in two planes, horizontally with the groundwater flow, and vertically through the soil profile, intrinsic remediation can be studied by following (1) the changes in the mass of contaminants along the flow paths, (2) the geochemical changes brought about by microbial metabolism along the flow paths and (3) the microbial activity and populations along the flow paths. A service station site with a discrete point source of contamination has been the focus of a number of studies on intrinsic remediation in groundwater. A site with extensive contamination over a wide area, a refinery site, has been the focus of studies on fate and transport of aromatic hydrocarbons in the vadose zone. These studies are reviewed here. Intrinsic remediation of aromatic hydrocarbons in groundwater Groundwater contamination and site characterisation The Swan Coastal Plain is essentially a sand plain with a shallow unconfined aquifer with groundwater flow from the hills to the east and to the Indian Ocean to the west. Depths to groundwater vary by up to 1.8 m depending on the season. In the zone of groundwater table fluctuation, there is generally a cemented layer of iron oxyhydroxide-coated organic enriched sand. 