In this paper, we describe the microbial desulfurization pathway of BTH by the previously reported Mycobacterium goodii strain X7B (17, 18). We examined the biodesulfurization of various organic sulfur compounds by strain X7B. The ability of M. goodii X7B to desulfurize gasoline in an immobilized-cell system was also evaluated. M. goodii X7B metabolized a broad range of organic sulfur compounds, suggesting its potential application for the desulfurization of fossil fuels. Chemicals.DBT, methylated DBTs, DBT sulfone, thiophene, thiophene acetic acid, thiophene carboxylic acid, 3,3′-thiodipropionic acid, 2-hydroxybiphenyl, and Tween 80 of the highest quality available were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich Chemical Co., Inc. BTH was purchased from ACROS Organic Co., Inc. 5-Methyl-BTH was purchased from Lancaster Synthesis (Morecambe, United Kingdom). Propylmercaptan (with a purity exceeding 97%) was purchased from Fluka Chemika (Buchs, Switzerland). All other commercially available chemicals were of analytical grade. Bacterial strains and medium.Mycobacterium sp. strain X7B was primarily isolated as a facultative thermophilic bacterial strain capable of degrading DBT to 2-hydroxybiphenyl at 45°C (17). The sulfur-free medium used for the growth of thermophilic bacteria was modification of A medium (MAM) as described previously (17). Estimation of organic sulfur compounds.M. goodii X7B was shaken at 45°C in MAM with BTH or other organic sulfur compounds dissolved in ethanol or N,N′-dimethylformamide as the sole sulfur source for bacterial growth. During the time course of bacterial growth, aliquots of the culture were removed and acidified to pH 2.0 by the addition of 6 N HCl, followed by extraction with ethyl acetate. A portion of the ethyl acetate layer was measured by use of a gas chromatograph (GC) (CP3380; Varian Associates, Inc.) fitted with an SPB-5 column (0.32-mm internal diameter by 30-m length; Supelco). When cultivated with BTH as the sole sulfur source, cells were inoculated in 50 ml of MAM containing BTH in a 300-ml screw-cap Erlenmeyer flask. Cultures containing BTH were cooled on ice for 20 min to prevent the volatilization of BTH before sampling according to a previously reported method (30). DBT, methylated DBTs, and other thiophenic compounds and their metabolites were also prepared in 50% ethanol and detected by high-performance liquid chromatography (Agilent 1100 series; Hewlett-Packard) with a reverse-phase C18 column (4.6 by 150 mm; Hewlett-Packard). The column was eluted with 80% methanol at a flow rate of 1.0 ml/min. DBT, 2-hydroxybiphenyl, BTH, and 5-methyl-BTH were monitored by measuring the A254. The molecular structures of metabolites of BTH and its derivates were analyzed by GC-mass spectrometry (GC-MS) (GCD 1800C; Hewlett-Packard) with a 50-m DB-5MS column (J & W Scientific, Folsom, Calif.). Before injection, the samples were concentrated under nitrogen gas. Analyses of gasoline were performed by GC-flame ionization detection (FID) and GC-atomic emission detection (AED). Hydrocarbon-containing compounds were detected by use of a FID instrument. The distribution of organic sulfur-containing compounds was determined by use of an AED instrument (Agilent G2350A; Hewlett-Packard). Sulfur removal from gasoline was determined by comparing the difference in the sulfur content in control oil and that in oil treated with immobilized X7B cells. The total sulfur content was determined in triplicate for each sample by measuring the combustion of oil and the amount of released sulfur dioxide by use of a sulfur analyzer (model 7000 SN; ANTEK, Houston, Tex.). Desulfurization reactions.Cells were immobilized by entrapment with calcium alginate, carrageenan, agar, polyvinyl alcohol, polyacrylamide, and gelatin-glutaraldehyde. We found that calcium alginate-immobilized cells had the highest DBT desulfurization activity, and therefore calcium alginate was selected as the biosupport material for this study (3, 26). Bacteria were cultured in MAM containing 0.5 mM DBT or 1 mM dimethyl sulfoxide as the sole sulfur source at 45°C. 