Mycobacterium goodii X7B, which had been primarily isolated as a bacterial strain capable of desulfurizing dibenzothiophene to produce 2-hydroxybiphenyl via the 4S pathway, was also found to desulfurize benzothiophene. The desulfurization product was identified as o-hydroxystyrene by gas chromatography (GC)-mass spectrometry analysis. This strain appeared to have the ability to remove organic sulfur from a broad range of sulfur species in gasoline. When Dushanzi straight-run gasoline (DSRG227) containing various organic sulfur compounds was treated with immobilized cells of strain X7B for 24 h, the total sulfur content significantly decreased, from 227 to 71 ppm at 40°C. GC flame ionization detection and GC atomic emission detection analysis were used to qualitatively evaluate the effects of M. goodii X7B treatment on the contents of gasoline. In addition, when immobilized cells were incubated at 40°C with DSRG275, the sulfur content decreased from 275 to 54 ppm in two consecutive reactions. With this excellent efficiency, strain X7B is considered a good potential candidate for industrial applications for the biodesulfurization of gasoline. Sulfur oxides released from fossil fuel combustion contribute to acid rain and air pollution (11, 24). With the increasing demands for energy and more stringent environmental policies, deep desulfurization of petroleum is becoming more and more desired. In terms of available technologies, the sulfur content in gasoline can be reduced to <30 ppm by current hydrotreatment processes. The major problem with deep desulfurization of gasoline is that conventional hydrodesulfurization (HDS) technology results in a significant reduction in the octane number due to the saturation of olefins in naphtha from fluid catalytic cracking, which also causes more hydrogen consumption (21). However, thiophenic compounds such as benzothiophene (BTH) and thiophene (T) and their derivates, as well as thiol, are major sulfur compounds in gasoline (23). If biodesulfurization (BDS) can be applied effectively to gasoline, the refiner will be offered a less expensive alternative to HDS that also avoids the drawback of octane degradation (20). Several studies on BTH- and dibenzothiophene (DBT)-desulfurizing bacteria have been reported (8, 13, 14, 22, 30, 31). The desulfurization pathway of Rhodococcus erythropolis IGTS8 (9) has been characterized. The dszA, -B, and -C genes, which are responsible for DBT desulfurization, have been cloned and sequenced, and their products have been characterized (5, 6, 16, 17, 19, 27). In addition, the BTH desulfurization pathway has been demonstrated for six bacteria: Gordonia sp. strain 213E (8), Rhodococcus sp. strain T09 (22), Paenibacillus sp. strain A11-2 (14), Sinorhizobium sp. strain KT55 (31), Rhodococcus sp. strain KT 462 (30), and Rhodococcus sp. strain WU-K2R (13). Furthermore, the desulfurization of both DBT and BTH by a single bacterium has only been reported for Paenibacillus sp. strain A11-2 (14) and Rhodococcus sp. strain KT462 (30). On the other hand, since distillate fractions are often treated at high temperatures, there may be some cost savings through the use of moderate thermophiles if BDS is integrated with HDS during refinery without cooling the stock to 30°C (15). Moreover, the desulfurization activity will also be enhanced due to the higher mass transfer rate at high temperatures (1). For practical BDS, it is useful to obtain microorganisms that exhibit much higher DBT and BTH desulfurization activities at high temperatures. 