Other identifications included Alcaligenes denitrificans (0.82%), Micrococcus spp. (10.7%), and Nocardia spp. (1.2%). The majority of P. aeruginosa strains exhibited similar protein-banding patterns and hydrocarbon catabolic activities (see above), cosegregating into the upper cluster of the dendrogram (Fig. 6), where they formed the first 13 AMBIS groups. A few P. aeruginosa isolates, however, displayed protein-banding patterns which differed significantly from the main body of isolates included in the upper cluster, and these cosegregated near the bottom of the dendrogram (AMBIS groups 49 to 51). P. aeruginosa isolates composing AMBIS groups 12 and 49 exhibited unusual catabolic activities compared with other P. aeruginosa groups, since they grew on selected alkanes, including hexane, octane, decane, cyclohexane, and methylcyclopentane in addition to the more frequently catabolized aromatics. Inclusion of these catabolically anomalous strains in P. aeruginosa is, therefore, suspect. P. putida, P. stutzeri, and the Micrococcus spp. were capable of catabolizing most alkanes and were distributed throughout the mid to lower regions of the dendrogram (Fig. 6). The principal advantage of vapor-phase growth tests such as those employed in this investigation is that they can be performed much more rapidly than more complex chemical analytical methods, thereby permitting the examination of large numbers of isolates with multiple hydrocarbon substrates in a reasonable time frame. Unlike batch culture techniques in which a single hydrocarbon concentration is typically employed, tests using hydrocarbon vapors offer organisms a range of substrate concentrations, if vapors are introduced gradually as was done in this study. Such a technique increases the likelihood of a positive growth response within some favorable concentration range of hydrocarbon. Assuming purity of the carbon source and inclusion of appropriate negative controls (e.g., incubation in the absence of substrate), a positive result is unambiguous and may be interpreted as catabolic (i.e., biodegradative) activity coupled to cellular growth. If test hydrocarbons are not absolutely pure, then a positive growth response could result from utilization of contaminant hydrocarbons. However, this possibility was unlikely, since more than 90 isolates which grew on toluene as a sole carbon source were unable to utilize this same substrate when it was present as a contaminant in ethylbenzene at a level of approximately 0.8% (wt/wt) (Fig. 5; Table FIG. 6. Composite dendrogram showing 51 AMBIS groupings made on the basis of computerized analysis of protein-banding patterns. Upper- and lower-cluster regions are indicated. Test hydrocarbons degraded within each AMBIS group are indicated by filled circles. Numbers and identifications of isolates are also provided. Abbreviations for hydrocarbons are given in the legend to Similarly, nearly 150 toluene-degrading isolates failed to utilize toluene present as a contaminant in o-xylene (the least-pure test substrate [Table 2]) at a concentration of 2.7% (wt/wt). These observations suggest that the concentrations of contaminant hydrocarbons were insufficient to support the growth of gasoline-degrading isolates examined in this study. As in all studies that employ growth responses on singlecarbon substrates, a negative result may be interpreted as (i) lack of a functional catabolic pathway or transport system, (ii) insufficient concentration of the test substrate (i.e., inadequate bioavailability), or (iii) biotoxicity. In addition, a negative growth response does not imply that a compound cannot be cometabolized or syntrophically utilized. It may be argued that inadequate bioavailability was not responsible for negative results in the present study, since all isolates grew on gasoline vapors in which the concentrations of individual hydrocarbon components were lower than those of the single test hydrocarbons subsequently employed. In addition, test hydrocarbons could have been expected to approach equilibrium concentrations at the surfaces of the agar plates given the lengthy incubation periods employed. 