Inadequate bioavailability may also be discounted on grounds that different isolates in the same subspecies group (e.g., P. putida in AMBIS group 33) often displayed different catabolic patterns, such that one or more hydrocarbons were utilized by one strain but not by another. To account for such discrepancies in substrate utilization, it must be postulated (i) that significant differences existed among otherwise closely related strains with regard to hydrocarbon affinity, transport kinetics, or other factors that could restrict bioavailability or (ii) that strains exhibited markedly different susceptibilities to the biotoxic effects of the same hydrocarbon. Whereas strain differences in specific-hydrocarbon affinity or toxicity are admittedly feasible, they have not been documented nor would they necessarily be expected in such closely related isolates. Moreover, assuming that such differences did exist, there is no a priori reason to suspect that they would have been of sufficient magnitude to account for the marked differences in growth responses of different strains on the same hydrocarbon. Furthermore, it may be inferred that none of the 15 test hydrocarbons was generally cytotoxic at levels employed in this study; otherwise, no isolate would have exhibited growth on that compound. In contrast, every test hydrocarbon was found to support the growth of at least one gasoline-degrading isolate. However, since biotoxicity or bioavailability was not rigorously proven or disproven, the growth response data tend to provide a conservative estimate of catabolic potential. Thus, catabolic groups defined by using vapor-phase growth tests might have hydrocarbon catabolic activities other than those actually observed. Despite this inherent conservatism, all gasoline hydrocarbon categories tested were found to have been directly catabolized under aerobic conditions. For purposes of predicting bioremediative feasibility at a hydrocarbon-contaminated site, a conservative estimate of catabolic potential provides a safer margin for error than a more liberal estimate of degradative ability. Given the qualifications discussed above, results of growth-screening tests and other methods employed in this investigation indicate that there was considerable physiologic and genetic heterogeneity among gasoline-degrading bacteria associated with the Seal Beach site. It is interesting to note that the growth-screening technique employed provided greater phenotypic resolution than one-dimensional protein-banding information, since a total of 111 catabolic groups were defined compared with 51 AMBIS groups. This difference was not entirely unexpected, since some catabolic enzymes having different substrate specificities might exhibit similar or identical mobilities in polyacrylamide gels. Furthermore, many catabolic enzymes may be present in cells at levels too low to be readily detectable in whole-cell protein preparations, thereby precluding their use as discriminatory signals in polyacrylamide gels. It is noteworthy that different members of the same species (e.g., P. aeruginosa or P. putida) often differed significantly with respect to their protein-banding patterns. This result is primarily attributable to the somewhat arbitrary use of a conservative correlation limit of 0.90 in constructing dendrograms and defining isolate groups. Delineation of AMBIS groups on the basis of a lower correlation value (e.g., 0.75) would have resulted in broader taxonomic groupings; however, significant discrepancies between banding pattern groups and conventional identifications would still have occurred. Thus, the use of onedimensional protein-banding pattern analysis to reliably infer phylogenetic relationships was limited in this study. Evidently, protein-banding information is not always adequately conserved for this purpose, even at the species level. Nevertheless, the protein-banding patterns were reproducible, and isolates composing each of the 51 AMBIS groups were consistently identified to the same species or subspecies. Thus, protein-banding information must be viewed in this study primarily as a means of resolving strain or subspecies differences, not as a technique for inferring phylogenetic relationships. Results of growth tests indicated that isolates displayed a predilection for aromatic hydrocarbons. Aromatic hydrocarbons constitute a major fraction of gasoline (24), and these compounds are more water soluble and less volatile than many aliphatic constituents. These characteristics favor the prevalence of aromatic hydrocarbons in groundwater contaminated by gasoline (5, 18, 29), and previous GC analyses of groundwater samples from the Seal Beach site are consistent with these concepts (unpublished data). Given the age of the plume (>6 years), it seems plausible that bacteria at the site might have had adequate time for significant physiologic and genetic adaptation to the aromatic fraction, which is consistent with the observed preference of the isolates for this hydrocarbon category. The majority of isolates were able to use only 2 or 3 different test hydrocarbons as growth substrates (Fig. 3). This observation is intriguing, since it may reflect an optimum level of catabolic potential that is inherently maintained by cells from this environment. Aside from arguments concerning unfavorable energetics, there is no a priori reason to expect that more catabolic activities could not have been maintained. 