Walker et al. (1975) also found an increase in absolute numbers of proteolytic bacteria, as well as lipolytic, chitinolytic and cellulolytic bacteria in oil contaminated subestuary of Chesapeake Bay. Microorganisms are known to attack specific compounds present in crude oil that is a complex mixture of saturates, aromatics and polar compounds (Bharathi and Vasudevan 2001). An effective degradation of crude oil would require simultaneous action of several metabolically versatile microorganisms with faourable environmental conditions such as pH, temperature and availability of nutrients (Venkateswaran and Harayama 1995). An oil spill in the environment leads to an adaptive process and if metabolically active hydrocarbon utilising microorganisms could be added quickly, the long period before the indigenous population could respond would be reduced considerably. The necessity for seeding with complementary hydrocarbon degrading bacteria arises from the rationale that indigenous microbial populations may not be capable of degrading a wide range of potential substrates in a complex mixture such as crude oil (Chhatre et al. 1996). It seems that a natural microbial community includes a variety of microorganisms that can degrade, alone or together, most crude oil components, but that some of their degrading ability would not be expressed in a single batch culture owing to unfavorable physiological conditions (Venkateswaran et al., 1995). When mixed cultures are grown in crude oil medium, some organic acids, which prevent the growth of the bacteria, are formed. However, in a mixed culture system, the growth of the organism cannot be regulated because of nutrient stress and competition. The ability of the designed bacterial consortium and individual bacteria with wide crude oil degrading capacity has been employed for the degradation of crude oil. The isolated crude oil degraders belong to the genera Micrococcus, Corynebacterium, Bacillus, Enterobacter, Pseudomonas, Alcaligenes, Flavobacterium, Moraxella, Aeromonas, Acinetobacter and Vibrio. The flora reflects the normal heterotrophic bacteria present in soil and native genera seem to be crude oil utilisers. Several other workers also reported on the above genera as hydrocarbon degrading microorganisms (Atlas 1981; Leahy and Colwell 1990; Banat et al. 2000). In general, bacterial consortium showed maximum percentage (78%) of degradation of crude oil after 20 days of incubation. Chhatre et al. (1996) reported about 60% of degradation of crude oil using a semicontinuous crude oil fed reactor using a four member consortium. Several other workers (Venkateswaran and Harayama 1995; Lal and Khanna 1996; Sugiura et al. 1997) showed that a bacterial consortium was able to degrade 28-51% of saturates and 0-18% of aromatics present in crude oil or up to 60% crude oil by mixed consortia. The percentage of biodegradation was significantly higher than that achieved by individual isolates. Among the four different pH tested, the bacterial growth and percentage degradation of crude oil were maximum at pH 7.5. Most of the heterotrophic bacteria favor a pH near neutrality (Atlas 1981). Temperature influences petroleum biodegradation by its effect on the physical nature and chemical composition of the oil, rate of hydrocarbon metabolism by microorganisms, and composition of the microbial community (Atlas 1981). Our studies showed maximum biodegradation activity at 30°C. Our research work clearly shows that oil contaminated soil can be a principle source for potent oil degrading bacteria. Genus Corynebacterium was dominant in all the samples 16 analyzed. It was observed that bacterial consortium degraded Bombay high crude oil efficiently when compared to the individual bacterial cultures tested. 