The plates were incubated at room temperature and the absorbance (590 nm) of the 96 wells was recorded over 120 h (Reader 2001, Anthos Labtec Instruments G.m.b.H., Salzburg, Austria). An incubation time of 72 h proved to be optimal for the soil samples. Sporulating and filamentous (SF) microorganisms were tested on Biolog" SF-N microplates using the same inoculum as before. One hundred microliters each of chloramphenicol (10 mg/L), streptomycin sulfate (10 mg/L), and benzylpenicillin (20 mg/L) were added to suppress bacterial growth in the soil suspension. The plates were incubated at room temperature for several days. For .actinomycetes and fungi, the incubation period was extended to 216 h. The 120-h readings were taken to best represent the community of sporulating and filamentous microbes. The SF-N microplates are identical to the GN microplates except the substrate wells lack the tetrazolium redox dye. Optical density (OD) readings were made at 590 nrn and indicated turbidity and thus growth. After inoculation, the SF-N microplates were incubated and the absorption of each well was read after 24 to 120 hand the data analyzed using Microsoft Excel". The color intensity of Biolog" GN microtiterplates is expressed as average well color development (AWCD) and calculated as the mean of the 95 absorbance values corrected for the control background. In SF-N plates lacking the electron acceptor dye, average well turbidity (AWT = OD 590) was calculated similarly to express the overall growth in the 95 wells. Hydrocarbons were extracted from soil with an equal amount of ethylacetate, the slurry treated with ultrasound, shaken, and centrifuged (Eschenbach et aI., 1994; Saner et al., 1996a). Extracts were analyzed by gas chromatography (DANI gas chromatograph [GC] 86.10 HT, with flame ionization detector [FID] 86/10 or the Gas Chromatograph Detector (GCD)-System Hewlett Packard [HP] G1800A) on Altech Econo-Cap capillary columns using 1 ~L of extract (injector temperature 250°C; carrier gas 1.0 mL/min helium; FID 275°C, split 1:50; temperature program: 1 min hold at 35°C, 35 to 200°C at 10°C/min ramp, 200 to 250°C at 5°C/min ramp). Diesel oil was quantified by adding up the peak areas in the retention time interval from 3 to 14.5 min. The number of substrates used by a microbial community is called substrate richness (S) and was defined as the number of background-corrected absorbance values greater than 0.5 absorbance units after 72-h incubation on GN microplates or after 120h on SF-N microplates. Pearson correlation coefficients (r) of the background-corrected absorbance values at 590 nm were calculated between single samples and the standard deviation (StD) among replicates was computed. Data used in community ecology are often multivariate. The relationships between the patterns of color formation also require multivariate statistical analysis to reduce. the multidimensional data into a more readily interpretable form. Characterization is done on the basis of a number of variables, here the respiratory activities of the microbial communities on the 95 different substrates. Comparisons must be made between plate readings of equivalent incubation times. The multivariate method of ordination was used to concentrate the data and to find causal or descriptive relations among samples (Gauch, 1982). From the numerous ordination techniques, principal components analysis (PCA) has been chosen using background-corrected absorbance values. PCA is an operation that projects the multivariate data onto a reduced number of dimensions (principal components) that capture a subset of the total variance in the data set (Pileou, 1984). With the software DataMost (1994), best results were achieved by selecting a variances-covariances matrix. The data are summarized, but still display the original pattern. For interpretation, the samples were plotted using the component values as graphical coordinates. A 5-month incubation of pristine and highly polluted soil, parallel to experimentally contaminated soil (1 % diesel or 0.2% phenanthrene) was carried out under static aerobic conditions and analyzed after 11 and 166 days. During the first 11 days, only slight changes in the composition of the endogenous microbial communities were observed. 