The amplified DNA (2 mg) was then labeled with Cy3 using random primers and the Klenow fragment of DNA polymerase I (Wu et al., 2006) and then purified and dried in a SpeedVac (45 1C, 45 min; ThermoSavant, Milford, MA, USA) before hybridization. GeoChip 4.0 hybridization and data pre-processing The GeoChip 4.0, containing 83 992 50-mer oligonucleotide probes targeting 152 414 genes in 410 gene categories for different microbial functional and biogeochemical processes, was synthesized by NimbleGen (Madison, WI, USA). All hybridizations were carried out at 42 1C with 40% formamide for 16 h on a MAUI hybridization station (BioMicro, Salt Lake City, UT, USA). After hybridization, the arrays were scanned (NimbleGen MS200, Madison, WI, USA) at a laser power of 100%. Signal intensities were measured based on scanned images, and spots with signal-to-noise ratios lower than 2 were removed before statistical analysis as described previously (He et al., 2010). Statistical analysis Pre-processed GeoChip data were further analyzed with different statistical methods: (i) microbial diversity index, the two-tailed t-test and response ratio (Luo et al., 2006); (ii) hierarchical clustering for microbial community structure and composition (de Hoon et al., 2004); (iii) analysis of similarity, permutational multivariate analysis of variance using distance matrices and multiresponse permutation procedure analysis of differences of microbial communities (Anderson, 2001); (iv) canonical correspondence analysis (CCA) for linking microbial communities to environmental variables (Ramette and Tiedje, 2007; Zhou et al., 2008); and (v) partial CCA for co-variation analysis of wellhead distance and environmental variables (variation partitioning analysis). Details for all methods are provided in the Supplementary Information. Results Functional gene changes in response to oil spill To assess the dynamic changes of microbial communities in response to oil spill, microbial community functional composition and structure were analyzed using functional gene arrays (GeoChip 4.0). Significantly more functional genes (Po0.01) were detected in the oil plume samples than in nonplume control (Supplementary Table S2). The overall microbial functional diversity was also significantly (Po0.01) higher in the plume samples based on Shannon–Weiner (H0 ) and Simpson’s (1/D) indices. Consistent with geochemical ordination patterns, hierarchical clustering analysis showed that all plume samples were clustered together and well separated from non-plume samples (Figure 1 Marine microbial communities for potential bioremediation of oil spills Z Lu et al 452 The ISME Journal and Supplementary Figure S1), as also shown for the microbial communities at a phylogenetic level (Hazen et al., 2010). However, considerable variability in functional gene distribution was observed among different samples and some functional genes were common to all samples, although others were unique to oil plume samples (Figure 1). For example, Group 6, with 1439 or 20.14% of all genes detected, largely involved in organic remediation, carbon degradation, denitrification, sulfate reduction, metal resistance and stress response, was generally detected in all samples. Groups 1, 2, 10 and 17, with 2.2%, 3.9%, 20.5% and 10.8% of all genes detected, were mainly detected in the plume samples (Figure 1). In addition, the microbial community functional structure was significantly (Po0.05) different between the plume and nonplume samples as revealed by the three complementary non-parametric multivariate statistical tests (analysis of similarity, permutational Marine microbial communities for potential bioremediation of oil spills The ISME Journal multivariate analysis of variance using distance matrices and multiresponse permutation procedure) (Table 1). Oil as a predominant factor shaping microbial community functional structure CCA was performed to determine the most significant environmental variables shaping microbial community structure. On the basis of variance in inflation factors, seven variables were selected: dissolved oxygen, temperature, total volatile HC, total extractable petroleum HC, fluorometer detection of oil, phosphate and iron. The specified CCA model was significant (P ¼ 0.026). Of these, the total volatile HC, extractable petroleum HC, fluorometer detection of oil and dissolved oxygen were the most significantly correlated with plume samples (Figure 2). To separate the effects of seawater geochemical variables, geographic distance and oil composition on microbial community structure, a CCA-based variation partitioning analysis (Ramette and Tiedje, 2007; Zhou et al., 2008) was performed. Seawater geochemical variables, oil composition and wellhead distance showed a significant correlation (P ¼ 0.041) with the functional gene structure of the community. Oil composition explained substantially more variations (48.34%, P ¼ 0.03) than seawater variables (21.76%, P ¼ 0.017), whereas distance independently explained 9.1% (P ¼ 0.43) of the observed variation (Figure 3). About 28% of the community functional variation based on GeoChip data remained unexplained by the above selected variables, which is significantly lower than those observed in other systems such as soils (Ramette and Tiedje, 2007; Zhou et al., 2008). These results indicate that oil contaminants could be a dominant factor shaping microbial community functional structure and potentially regulating associated microbial functional processes. Oil spill stimulated increase in functional genes for HC degradation A substantial number of genes involved in HC degradation were detected in the oil plume samples (Hazen et al., 2010), especially those involved in degrading alkanes, alkynes and cycloalkanes, BTEX and related aromatics, chlorinated aromatics, heterocyclic aromatics, nitroaromatics, polycyclic aromatics and aromatic carboxylic acids. For Table 1 Significance of the effects of the oil spill on the overall microbial community structure and geochemical pattern using three statistical analyses Method Geochemical parametersa Microbial community Statistic P-value Statistic P-value MRPPb 233.112 0.037 53.617 0.003 ANOSIMc 0.057 0.046 0.501 0.002 Adonisd 0.258 0.043 0.192 o0.001 Abbreviations: ANOSIM, analysis of similarity; MRPP, multi response permutation procedure. a Geochemical parameters included temperature, DO concentration, fluorometer detection of oil, small particle concentrations, Fe, nitrate, phosphate, benzene, toluene, naphthalene, ethylbenzene, isopropylbenzene, n-propylbenzene, 1,3,5-trimethylbenzene, tert-butylbenzene, 1,2,4-trimethylbenzene, sec-butylbenzene, p-isopropyltoluene, n-butylbenzene, total xylenes, total volatile HC and total petroleum hydrocarbons—extractable (DRO). b Multiple response permutation procedure, a nonparametric procedure that does not depend on assumptions such as normally distributed data or homogeneous variances, but rather depends on the internal variability of the data. c Analysis of similarities. 