d Non-parametric multivariate analysis of variance (MANOVA) with the adonis function. All three tests are non-parametric multivariate analyses based on dissimilarities among samples. Figure 2 CCA compares the GeoChip hybridization signal intensities (symbols) and environmental variables (arrows). Environmental variables were chosen based on significance calculated from individual CCA results and variance inflation factors (VIFs) calculated during CCA. The percentage of variation explained by each axis is shown, and the relationship is significant (P ¼ 0.026). Figure 3 Variation partitioning based on CCA for all functional gene signal intensities. (a) General outline, (b) all functional genes. A CCA-based VIF was performed to identify common sets of oil composition and seawater variables important to the microbial community structure. Oil composition variables included fluorometer detection of oil, the concentration of total volatile HCs, xylenes and petroleum HCs—extractable (DRO). Seawater geochemical variables included temperature, dissolved oxygen (DO), Fe and phosphate. Marine microbial communities for potential bioremediation of oil spills Z Lu et al 454 The ISME Journal example, gene alkB encoding alkane 1-monooxygenase, a key enzyme responsible for the initial oxidation of inactivated alkanes, showed a significantly (Po0.05) higher abundance, with 19–26 genes detected in the oil contaminated samples and 11–15 detected in the non-oil contaminated samples. The alkB genes derived from Rhodospirillum centenum SW, Bdellovibrio bacteriovorus HD100, Prauserella rugosa, Roseobacter sp. CCS2, Mycobacterium bovis AF2122/97, Bacillus sp. BTRH40, Gordonia sp. Cg and Rhodococcus sp. RHA1 appeared to be dominant in all oil plume samples (Supplementary Figure S2). GeoChip analysis also detected many aerobic PAH degradation genes from a variety of microorganisms (Figure 4 and Supplementary Figure S3). PAH degradation genes were more abundant in the plume samples, while some were unique to the plume samples. Although oxygen was still present in the plume samples (Camilli et al., 2010; Hazen et al., 2010), the gene bbs (beta-oxidation of benzylsuccinate) for anaerobic toluene degradation was also enriched in plume samples. These bbs genes were derived from putative E-phenylitaconyl-CoA hydratase of Azoarcus sp. EbN1 and Thauera aromatic, and benzylsuccinyl-CoA dehydrogenase of Azoarcus sp. EbN1 (Figure 5). Shifts of the genes involved in key biogeochemical cycling processes Carbon. Among the carbon cycling genes detected, 798 genes involved in the degradation of complex carbon compounds, such as starch, hemicellulose, cellulose, chitin, lignin and aromatics, showed positive hybridization signals. Most of these genes (for example, pulA, xylA, xynA, lip, limEH and vanA) showed significantly (Po0.05) higher abundance in plume than in non-plume samples (Supplementary Figure S4). These types of genes could also be important in degradation of various oil components and their intermediates. In this study, 9–14 mcrA genes encoding the a subunit of methyl coenzyme M reductase and 5–8 Figure 4 The normalized signal intensity of the nahA genes (naphthalene 1,2-dioxygenase) for the initial oxidation of naphthalene. The signal intensity for each sequence was the average of the total signal intensity from all the replicates. Gene number is the protein ID number for each gene as listed in the GenBank database. 