A substantial number (917) of the genes involved in resistance to various metals were detected, many of which showed significantly (Po0.05) increased abundance in plume samples (Supplementary Figure S9). Genes encoding reductases for As (arsC) and Hg (mer), efflux transporters for Cd (cadA), Cu, Co and Zn (czcA and czcD), Cr (ChrA), Cu (copA), Hg (merT), Ag (silC) and Zn (zntA), and the proteins involved in Te resistance Figure 6 The relative changes of the detected genes involved in the N cycle in oil plume. The signal intensity for each gene detected was normalized by all detected gene sequences using the mean. The percentage of a functional gene in a bracket was the sum of signal intensity of all detected sequences of this gene divided by the grand sum of signal intensity of the detected N cycle genes, and weighted by the fold change of the signal intensity of this gene in plume to that in non-plume. For each functional gene, red indicates that this gene had a higher signal intensity in plume than in non-plume and their significance was indicated with two stars (**) at Po0.01, whereas blue indicates that this gene had a lower signal intensity in oil-plume than in non-plume. Grey-colored genes were not targeted by this GeoChip, or not detected in those samples. It remains unknown if nosZ homologs exist in nitrifiers. Description of the genes: (a) gdh, encoding glutamate dehydrogenase, ureC, encoding urease responsible for ammonification; (b) nasA, encoding nitrate reductase, NiR, encoding nitrite reductase, responsible for assimilatory N reduction; (c) nifH, encoding nitrogenase responsible for N2 fixation; (d) narG encoding nitrate reductase, nirS and nirK-D (with denitrification activity), encoding nitrite reductase; nosZ, encoding nitrous oxide reductase, norB, encoding nitric oxide reducatse, responsible for denitrification (e) napA, encoding periplasmic nitrate reductase, nrfA, encoding c-type cytochrome nitrite reducatse, responsible for dissimilatory N reduction to ammonium; (f) hao, encoding hydroxylamine oxidoreductase, and nirK-N encoding nitrite reductase for nitrifiers (an indication of nitrification activity), responsible for nitrification. Marine microbial communities for potential bioremediation of oil spills Z Lu et al 456 The ISME Journal (terC, terD and terZ) were more (Po0.05 or 0.01) abundant in the plume samples. Bacteriophages were also significantly stimulated In total, 52 bacterial phage genes associated with host recognition, lysis, replication and structure were observed in all samples. The signal intensities for many of the genes involved in replication were significantly (Po0.05) higher in the plume than in the non-plume samples (Figure 7), supporting the suggestion by Head et al. (2006) that bacteriophages could be an important factor for intrinsic bioremediation of HCs. Discussion The Deepwater Horizon oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico was one of the worst environmental disasters in the United State history. The impact of an oil spill of such an unprecedented magnitude and depth on marine ecosystems is largely unknown. Using the GeoChip-based high-throughput microarray technology, we showed that diverse microbial functional groups (a group of genes involved in certain functional processes), including those important to HC degradation, carbon metabolism, methanogenesis, nitrogen assimilation, sulfate reduction, phosphorus release, metal resistance and bacteriophage replication, were more highly represented in the oil plume samples than in non-plume samples from the same depth. Also, the changes in community functional structure were highly correlated to the changes in geochemistry, with oil being the predominant factor shaping the functional composition and structure of the microbial communities. Our results support the phylogenybased study by Hazen et al. (2010) that the deepsea marine microbial communities underwent a dynamic change in response to the oil spill and associated geochemical changes. Our results are also consistent with previous studies of oil spill and petroleum contamination (Harayama et al., 2004; Head et al., 2006; Bordenave et al., 2007), which showed that microorganisms able to utilize HCs became dominant in oil-contaminated sites. Such functional gene information is useful for assessing the impacts of oil spills and should facilitate the design of appropriate strategies and approaches to deal with petroleum contamination. The clean-up of the deep-sea oil plume will primarily depend on the indigenous microbes present in this environment, as current technology does not allow removing the dispersed oil and gas at such great depths. One of the critical environmental questions is whether microorganisms for degrading various HCs exist in the community and whether they respond to oil spill. Our GeoChip results indicated that many functional genes/populations involved in both aerobic and anaerobic degradation of various oil components are detected and/or enriched in the oil plume, indicating that the indigenous HC-degrading populations are capable of responding to the oil spill. For example, alkB for alkanes, Xamo for alkene, genes bco, ohbAB, GCoADH and pimF for benzoate, genes mdlA, mdlB and mdlC for mandelate, and genes Apc and catB for BTEX metabolic pathway exhibited a significantly (Po0.05) higher abundance in the oil plume than in the non-oil plume. The changes in relative abundance of these genes/populations were significantly correlated with the concentrations of various oil contaminants in the samples (Hazen et al., 2010). Figure 7 The normalized signal intensity of the replication genes for bacteriophage. The signal intensity for each sequence was the average of the total signal intensity from all the replicates. Gene number is the protein ID number for each gene as listed in the GenBank database. All data are presented as mean±s.e. 