The latter can be used to functionalize the methane via the pMMO (Figure 1C). Based on stoichiometry (3CH4 + 8NO2- + 8H+ → 3CO2 + 4N2 + 10H2O), four molecules of O2 could be generated from eight molecules of nitrite, of which only three are required for methane activation by pMMO (Wu et al., 2011). Based on oxygen uptake and inhibition experiments with cell extracts and UV–visible absorption spectral characteristics and electron spin resonance (EPR) spectroscopy of solubilized membranes, the remaining oxygen might be consumed by a membrane-bound bo-type terminal oxidase (Wu et al., 2011). Methane Addition to Fumarate The addition of non-methane alkanes to fumarate (i.e., fumarate addition) is a prevalent anaerobic alkane activation mechanism observed under nitrate- and sulfate-reducing conditions (see below). Although the majority of studies have focused on longer-chain alkanes, a few investigations have revealed that short alkanes, such as propane, are also added to fumarate terminally or subterminally under sulfate-reducing conditions (Kniemeyer et al., 2007; Savage et al., 2010). These findings are supported by field metabolomic studies of petroleum reservoirs and coalbeds in which low molecular weight gases such as methane are prevalent and low molecular weight alkylsuccinates, including methylsuccinate, have been detected (Duncan et al., 2009; Gieg et al., 2010; Wawrik et al., 2012). Due to the complex mixture of hydrocarbons in oil reservoirs and coalbeds, it is possible that the low molecular weight alkylsuccinates are derived from cometabolic hydrocarbon metabolism, as has been observed for toluene in anaerobic alkane-degrading bacteria (Rabus et al., 2011). However, the detection of methylsuccinate is intriguing nonetheless because it suggests that AOM via fumarate addition may be possible (Figure 1D). Thermodynamically, however, there are several considerations with respect to the formation of the methyl radical and the terminal electron accepting conditions. The formation of a methyl radical (439 kJ mol-1) (Lide, 2003) would be at the expense of the glycyl radical formation (350 kJ mol-1) (Armstrong et al., 1996). The difference in dissociation energies (90 kJ) is considerably larger than that for other alkane substrates (~60 kJ) (Thauer and Shima, 2008), and at first glance, it would not appear that the transition state of the enzyme could overcome such a barrier. A study using quantum chemical calculations to investigate the energetics of methane addition to fumarate (Beasley and Nanny, 2012) also predicts that the initial reaction (i.e., homolytic cleavage of the C-H bond in methane by the methylethyl radical) is unfavorable, but that all other steps in the proposed reaction are favorable, with an overall energy change that is exothermic. Given that glycyl radical enzymes are functional dimers, it is possible that the initial energy barrier might be overcome via coupling the endergonic steps of the catalytic cycle in one active site with exergonic steps in the catalytic cycle of the second active site (Thauer and Shima, 2008). Whether AOM via fumarate addition proceeds with sulfate versus nitrate or nitrite as the terminal electron acceptor has also been debated. It is hypothesized that the majority or all of the free energy generated from this process with sulfate as the terminal electron acceptor (ΔG°′ = -21 kJ/mol) would be dissipated as heat in the initial activation step, which would not allow enough energy for subsequent reactions, whereas the free energy change using nitrate or nitrite as a terminal electron acceptor is more energetically favorable (Thauer and Shima, 2008). Anaerobic Oxidation of Non-Methane Alkanes Alkane Addition to Fumarate One of the most well characterized mechanisms of anaerobic alkane activation and degradation is the addition of non-methane alkanes across the double bond of fumarate to form alkyl-substituted succinates. This was first demonstrated in a sulfate-reducing, dodecane-utilizing enrichment culture (Kropp et al., 2000) and was subsequently found to be applicable to a range of n-alkane and cycloalkane substrates (C3–C16) in several sulfate-reducing and nitrate-reducing isolates and cultures (Rabus et al., 2001; Wilkes et al., 2002, 2003; Rios-Hernandez et al., 2003; Cravo-Laureau et al., 2005; Davidova et al., 2005; Callaghan et al., 2006; Kniemeyer et al., 2007; Musat et al., 2010). Although subterminal addition of n-alkanes to fumarate appears to be a prevalent feature of the fumarate addition mechanism (Figure 2A), other modes include C3 addition (Rabus et al., 2001) and C1 addition (Kniemeyer et al., 2007), both of which have been proposed as side-reactions. The alkyl-substituted succinates are further degraded via carbon-skeleton rearrangement followed by decarboxylation and β-oxidation (Wilkes et al., 2002). FIGURE 2. (A) Proposed pathway and stereochemistry for the anaerobic activation and degradation of hexane via subterminal addition to fumarate (adapted from Jarling et al., 2012); (B) Proposed pathway of activation and degradation of non-methane alkanes via “intra-aerobic denitrification” (adapted from Zedelius et al., 2011); and (C) Proposed pathway of activation and degradation of non-methane alkanes via anaerobic hydroxylation by Desulfococcus oleovorans Hxd3 (Sünwoldt et al., 2012). Enzyme nomenclature: putative thiyl radical of the alkylsuccinate/methylalkylsuccinate synthase-like enzyme (Enz-CysS); alkane monooxygenase (ALK); cytochromes P450 (CYP); and ethylbenzene dehydrogenase (EBDH). Analogous to the glycyl radical mechanism of benzylsuccinate synthase (BSS) and its homologs, which catalyze the addition of aromatic hydrocarbons to fumarate (for reviews see Boll and Heider, 2010; Meckenstock and Mouttaki, 2011), alkane activation is presumably catalyzed by the glycyl radical enzyme, alkylsuccinate synthase (ASS) (Callaghan et al., 2008b) or methylalkylsuccinate synthase (MAS) (Grundmann et al., 2008), for which the sulfate-reducing strain Desulfatibacillum alkenivorans AK-01 and the denitrifying strain ‘Aromatoleum’ HxN1 currently serve as model strains, respectively. Comparison of ass/mas genes to bss genes has revealed several similarities. Both AK-01 and HxN1 contain genes encoding putative glycyl radical activating enzymes, belonging to the radical S-adenosylmethionine (SAM) superfamily. Similar to BSS activase, which generates a glycyl radical on the catalytic subunit of BSS (Leuthner et al., 1998; Krieger et al., 2001; Verfürth et al., 2004), it is thought that the ASS activase is responsible for the generation of the glycyl radical on the catalytic subunit of the alkane-activating enzyme. Subsequent generation of a thiyl radical on a conserved cysteine residue (Selmer et al., 2005) would result in the abstraction of an H atom from the hydrocarbon substrate (Heider et al., 1998). In the case of BSS, the reaction results in the stereospecific formation of R(+)-benzylsuccinate (Beller and Spormann, 1998; Leutwein and Heider, 1999), wherein the initially abstracted H atom is transferred to the same face of fumarate (Qiao and Marsh, 2005). Unlike benzylsuccinate, however, methylalkylsuccinic acids contain two chiral carbons. 