This may have occurred through a relaxing of the specificity of regulation, concomitant with a change in the acid sequences of selected a subunits of initial aromatic dioxygenases. The phenogram was constructed with SEQBOOT (100-bootstrap analysis), and the data set was passed through the PRODIST, NEIGHBOR, and CONSENSE programmes of the PHYLIP package (version 3.2). The final tree was redrawn with branch lengths scaled to reflect percent differences of the aligned sequences. The percentage bootstrap values are indicated. FIG. 4. Phenogram based on an alignment of the deduced amino acid sequences of selected extradiol aromatic dioxygenases. The phenogram was constructed with SEQBOOT (100-bootstrap analaysis), and the data set was passed through the PRODIST, NEIGHBOR, and CONSENSE programmes of the PHYLIP package (version 3.2). The final tree was redrawn with branch lengths scaled to reflect percent differences of the aligned sequences. The percentage bootstrap values are indicated. present in Sphingomonas CB3 were also present in soils associated with these industries. The carAa(partial)/carAb/carAc/carAd(partial) was therefore selected as a target for PCR amplification directly from soil specificity of the initial dioxygenase; (ii) That some intermediates of the biphenyl pathway can serve as substrates to enzymes of the car locus; (iii) The genes and gene order of the car locus from CB3 show greater homology to characterised bph loci than to the previously described car genes of CA10; (iv) The dihydrodiol dehydrogenase encoded by carB may not be required for carbazole degradation. Previous studies have suggested that its product 2*-aminobiphenyl-2,3-diol may form spontaneously from the product of the initial dioxygenase [2,3,5,6], however these studies have yet to be supported by resting-cell assays using a cloned carbazole dioxygenase. Environmental Occurrence of the car Genes As with all sequencing studies it is important to bear in mind the significance of the characterised genes not only from the prespective of the host wild type strain, but also from an environmental or ecological perspective. Given that azaarenes such as carbazole have been detected in ground water at industrial locations such as town gas sites [34], coal gasification plants [35] and creosote contaminated soils [36] we were interested in determining whether car genes analagous to those FIG. 5. DNase-treated RNA extracts from Sphingomonas strain CB3 were amplified by RT-PCR (plus PCR controls) using primers specific for a 1460-bp fragment partially encompassing four components of the carbazole dioxygenase (carAa(partial)/carAb/carAc/carAd(partial)). Aliquots of 10 ml were run on a 0.9% agarose gel. Lanes correspond to: 1 and 13, 1-kb DNA ladder (BRL); 2, RT-PCR carbazole-grown CB3; 3, RT-PCR acetate-grown CB3; 4, RT-PCR acetategrown CB3 induced with carbazole; 5, RT-PCR acetate-grown CB3 induced with biphenyl; 6, RT-PCR blank (no target nucleic acid); 7, PCR carbazole-grown CB3; 8, PCR acetate-grown CB3; 9, PCR acetate-grown CB3 induced with carbazole; 10, acetate-grown CB3 induced with biphenyl; 11, PCR 0.1mg CB3 genomic DNA (5 ml aliquot); 12, PCR blank (no target nucleic acid). DNA extracts. Pristine soils and PAH contaminated soils were collected from the site of a former town gas site in Hamilton, New Zealand. Using a 25 cycle PCR amplification we were able to detect by hybridisation of a Southern blot the presence of carAa(partial)/carAb/ carAc/carAd(partial) in only the most contaminated soil sample HHS, but not in less heavily contaminated and uncontaminated soils (Figure 6). These results indicate that the car genes are indeed present as a component of the microbial population present in some contaminated soils. The development of additional strategies for environmental probing will ultimately benefit from the continued characterisation of diverse catabolic genes such as the car genes we have described in this study. Further studies would be useful to determine whether these car genes are enriched in environments contaminated with azaarenes such as carbazole or are broadly distributed. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS Financial support provided by the New Zealand Foundation for Research, Science and Technology (CO9615), and by the New Zealand Lottery Board Commission is acknowledged. J.M.S. is the recipient of a University of Waikato Postgraduate Scholarship. We thank Andrew Laurie for assistance with the phylogenetic analysis. 