Before extraction, 23 ,ul of a methylene chloride solution containing 134 mg of 7,8-benzoquinoline per ml (Aldrich Chemical Co., Inc.) as a GC standard was added to each culture flask. The medium was extracted at neutral pH, dried, and concentrated as outlined by Fedorak and Westlake (5). The concentrated extracts from duplicate flasks were combined and adsorbed onto 3 g of neutral alumina. This was added to 6 g of neutral alumina in a chromatography column (30 by 1.1 cm) and developed sequentially with 30 ml of hexane, 50 ml of benzene, and 70 ml of chloroform to give, respectivley, the saturate, aromatic, and nitrogen polycyclic aromatic (NPAC) fractions as described by Later et al. (15). The NPAC fraction was passed through a silicic acid column (15), and the secondary nitrogen polycyclic aromatic heterocycles (2°-PANH) were eluted with 70 ml of hexane-benzene (1:1). After the solvents had been removed under vacuum, the three fractions were analyzed by capillary GC techniques. The conditions used for the analysis of the aromatic fraction with simultaneous, specific detection of the sulfur heterocycles were given by Fedorak and Westlake (7). The saturates and nitrogen heterocycles were analyzed with a HewlettPackard (model 5710) GC with a modified injection port (18) into which two SE52 wall-coated, fused silica columns (25 m by 0.2 mm) were fitted. The outlet end of one column was attached to a flame ionization detector, and the outlet of the other was attached to a nitrogen-specific detector. The injection port and detectors were at 300°C. The saturates were chromatographed by using the following oven temperature program: 90°C for 4 min, 4°C per min to 270°C, which was held for 12 min. The temperature program used for the nitrogen heterocycle analysis was 170 to 270°C at 2°C per min. Helium was used as a carrier and a make-up gas. Peak heights from the nitrogen-specific detector were used to quantitate the alkyl carbazoles (14). The most abundant nitrogen-containing compounds in the NPAC fraction of a Norman Wells oil sample, which were amenable to capillary GC analysis, were identified by GCmass spectrometry. This analysis was done by using a DB-1 capillary column in a Varian 3700 GC in series with a Finnigan System MAT212 mass spectrometer linked to a Finnigan data system. Nitrogen contents of the whole oil and the 2°-PANH were determined by the microanalytical laboratory in the Department of Chemistry, University of Alberta. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION Norman Wells crude oil was found to contain 0.25% nitrogen. The 2°-PANH fraction of unaltered oil made up 4.0% of the weight of the crude oil and contained 1.42% nitrogen. This nitrogen-rich fraction, which was used for GC analyses, contained 22.7% of the nitrogen present in the crude oil. GC-mass spectrometry analysis of the NPAC fraction of Norman Wells oil showed that major nitrogen compounds gave the molecular ion series mlz = 181, 195, 209, 223, and 237. These correspond to either alkyl (Cl to C5) carbazoles or azafluorenes (4). There were no detectable amounts of quinolines, benzoquinolines, their alkyl homologs, or carbazole. Fractionation of the NPAC fraction on a silicic acid column verified that only alkyl carbazoles were present. Later et al. (15) showed that the alkyl carbazoles eluted with 50 ml of hexane-benzene (1:1) as part of the 2°-PANH fraction. However, more polar solvents (benzene, then benzene-ethyl ether) were required to elute azaarenes such as benzoquinolines, quinolines, and azafluorenes. GC analysis of the NPAC and the 2°-PANH fractions with the nitrogen-specific detector gave nearly identical chromatograms. 