The carbazoleenriched culture attacked the alkyl carbazoles more readily than the sulfur heterocyles. After 2 days of incubation, isomers of the C1- and C2-carbazoles were degraded, but there had been no change in the sulfur heterocycle chromatogram. By day 4, the C2- and C3-benzothiophenes, dibenzothiophene (the sulfur analog of carbazole), and the C1-dibenzothiophenes had been removed from the oil. During the same interval, several C2- and C3-carbazoles were degraded, and by day 6, most of the C3-carbazoles had been removed. The degradation of the more complex alkyl dibenzothiophenes lagged behind that of the alkyl carbazoles since 8 days of incubation were needed to remove the C2-dibenzothiophenes, whereas the C2-carbazoles were removed in 4 days. By day 28, some of the C3-dibenzothiophene isomers had been degraded. The enrichment on carbazole also appears to have enhanced the ability to degrade the sulfur heterocycles. For example, the C2-dibenzothiophenes were completely removed from the oil by day 8 by the carbazoleenriched culture (Table 2), whereas these were still present on day 28 in the residual oil from the oil-degrading enrichment culture which had not been enriched or carbazole. The intermediates and end products of the metabolism of these carbazoles are at present unknown. Since the alkyl carbazoles make up only 0.04% of the weight of the oil, detection of any intermediates in the oil matrix was not attempted. Finnerty et al. (8) have detected a minimum of six unidentified, water-soluble compounds on thin-layer chroTABLE 2. Degradation of alkyl carbazoles and sulfur heterocycles in Norman Wells crude oil incubated with the carbazole-enriched mixed culture Day Carbazoles degradeda Sulfur heterocycles degraded matography plates after growing their isolate C4 on carbazole. Work with dibenzothiophene, the sulfur analog of carbazole, has shown that the products formed from its metabolism still have the benzothiophene rings intact (13). However, in the case of the nitrogen heterocycle, it is quite possible that the pyrrole ring is broken, since the four carbazole degraders isolated by Finnerty et al. (8) also use this compound as a nitrogen source. The data presented in this paper show that mixed microbial populations are capable of degrading a wide variety of alkyl carbazoles in a crude oil. Although such compouhds are present in only small quantities in crude oils, their susceptibilities toward microbial attack have not previously been reported. It is likely that the same degradation sequence (but not the same rate) would be observed in environments that have received acute crude oil contaminations. The presence of nitrogen compounds in petroleum refinery feed stocks is known to poison catalysts (20); therefore, their selective removal from petroleum is desirable. Finnerty et al. (8) have only reported on the removal of carbazole from oils spiked with that compound. Our findings indicate that a range of alkyl carbazoles may also be susceptible to such a microbial denitrogenation process. 