Quinoline served as the sole carbon source when ammonium was present as a nitrogen source for a bacterium isolated by Grant and Al-Najiar (9). Finnerty et al. (8) have reported studies on four bacterial isolates able to use carbazole as their sole source of carbon, nitrogen, and energy. In laboratory studies, Bohonos et al. (3) have used waters from lakes, streams, and sewage plants as sources of inocula. When added to six water samples, carbazole was biodegraded in five of these, quinoline in all six, and benzo[f]quinoline in two. The addition of quinoline along with benzoUWquinoline yielded degradation of the latter compound in all six waters tested. Dibenzo[c,g]carbazole was not degraded when tested alone or with inducing compounds (carbazole or naphthalene) present. DeLeon et al. (4) have compared fresh unweathered oil from the Ixtoc-1 blowout with heavily weathered oil from that source. Qualitatively, the nitrogen heterocycle profiles were almost identical, and they concluded that weathering does not adversely affect the distribution of higher-molecular-weight azaarenes such as C3- and C4-phenathridinesbenzoquinolines. Norman Wells crude oil, which was used for this study, contains a variety of alkyl carbazoles. This paper presents a method for analyzing these compounds and describes their sequential degradation by mixed microbial populations. The residual oil from laboratory cultures was separated by column chromatography to give a nitrogen-rich fraction which was initially characterized by GC-mass spectrometry and then routinely analyzed by capillary GC, using a nitrogenspecific detector. MATERIALS AND METHODS Sources of inocula and culture methods. In 1973, beach material which had been contaminated with aviation fuel was on June 21, 2017 by INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY NEW DELHI http://aem.asm.org/ Downloaded from DEGRADATION OF ALKYL CARBAZOLES 859 collected from the shore of Shell Lake, Northwest Territories, Canada. At that time, 10 g was added to 1 liter of sterile mineral medium (2 g of Na2SO4, 0.2 g of MgSO4 * 7H20, 0.5 g of K2HPO4, 1 g of NH4Cl, 2 g of KNO3, and a trace of FeSO4 per liter of distilled water) and adjusted to pH 7.4 before autoclaving. Then 1 ml of Prudhoe Bay crude oil was added, and the culture was incubated at 30째C on a rotary shaker (250 rpm; eccentricity, 3.8 cm). This enrichment culture has been maintained since that time by monthly transfers into fresh mineral medium and oil. Several months before the start of this study, a 10% inoculum was added to 200 ml of mineral medium containing 100 mg of carbazole. This new enrichment culture was incubated at 25째C on a rotary shaker and transferred every 2 weeks to fresh mineral medium with carbazole as the sole carbon source. The carbazole-enriched culture served as a source of inoculum for a time course biodegradation experiment. Aliquots (20 ml) of this culture were added to 14 flasks containing 200 ml of mineral medium and 0.2 ml of Norman Wells crude oil. After various times of incubation at 25째C (0, 1, 2, 4, 6, 8, and 28 days), the residual oil from two flasks was extracted and combined for analysis. Controls containing Norman Wells crude oil and 200 ml of sterile mineral medium were incubated and extracted at each time to account for any substrate loss due to volatilization. The original oil-degrading culture described above, which had not been enriched on carbazole, was also tested for its ability to degrade the nitrogen heterocycles in Norman Wells crude oil. We added 20 ml of this culture to two flasks containing 200 ml of mineral medium and 0.2 ml of oil. These were incubated at 25째C on a shaker for 28 days, and the residual oil was extracted for analysis. Extraction, fractionation, and analyses of oil fractions. 