Grimmer et al. (10) found alkyl carbazoles to be approximately 0.02% by weight of a Qatar crude oil. During initial investigations of the degradation of the alkyl carbazoles, cultures were acidified and extracted as in our previous studies (5, 7). This, however, led to the appearance of several unidentified, foreign nitrogenous compounds in the GC traces which complicated interpretation of the results. This problem was to a large extent overcome by extracting the cultures at neutrality. Occasionally, foreign peaks were observed; these are marked "X" in the figure. Table 1 shows the sequential loss of the alkyl carbazoles by the carbazole-enriched, oil-degrading mixed population. After only 1 day of incubation, degradation of some of the nitrogen heterocycles was apparent. A contaminating nitrogen compound masked peaks 2 and 3 in the C1 region in the day 1 sample, but peak 1 had been removed and therefore the loss was reported as .45%. Also within the first day, 30% of the C2 carbazoles were removed from the oil. Losses measured at .10% were not considered significant and were reported as "ND." By day 2, most (86%) of the C1- carbazoles were removed from the oil and 53% of the C2- carbazoles had been degraded. Loss of the C3 isomers was detected on day 4, and by day 6 degradation of some of the C4-carbazoles was observed. The maximum loss of alkyl carbazoles was observed after 8 days, and no further degradation occurred during the next 20 days of incubation. There was no detectable loss of the C5-carbazoles over the 28-day incubation period. These results indicate that the mixed microbial population which had been enriched on carbazole as its sole carbon source was capable of degrading many of the alkyl carbazoles in Norman Wells crude oil. In general, the lower the number of alkyl carbons on the carbazole ring, the more susceptible the compound was to biodegradation. That is, the C1 compounds were degraded before the C2 compounds, which were degraded before the C3 compounds, and so on. This trend has also been observed for alkylsubstituted aromatic hydrocarbons (6) and for alkyl-substituted sulfur heterocycles (7). The data in Fig. 1 compare the alkyl carbazole-degrading capabilities of the carbazole enrichment culture with those of the non-carbazole-enriched, oil-degrading culture from which it was derived. After 28 days of incubation, the oildegrading culture has removed the Cr- and most of the C2- carbazoles from the oil, but there has been little activity on the C3 and C4 isomers. However, most of the C3-carbazoles and peak 2 in the C4 region had been removed or diminished by the carbazole enrichment culture. Thus, the prior exposure to carbazole increased the ability of the mixed culture to utilize a wider range of the alkyl carbazoles. The actual time or number of transfers on carbazole-containing medium required to enhance this activity likely was less than the several months used in this study. The enrichment culture was maintained while the analytical method was being developed. The carbazole-enriched culture was also able to degrade a wide range of non-nitrogen compounds in the Norman Wells crude oil. These included the n-alkanes and isoprenoids (pristane and phytane) present in the saturate fraction and many compounds in the aromatic fraction such as naphthalene, C1-, C2-, and C3-naphthalenes, phenanthrene, and C1- phenanthrenes. Many sulfur heterocycles were present in this crude oil, and Table 2 compares their sequential degradation with that of the alkyl carbazoles. 