Analysis of the benzene fraction from the silicic acid column showed that there were some alkyl carbazoles left after the 50 ml of hexane-benzene, but no other resolvable nitrogen compounds were present. The benzene-ethyl ether fraction showed no peaks when analyzed with the nitrogenspecific detector. We found that 70 ml of hexane-benzene (1:1) removed all of the alkyl carbazoles and 7,8-benzoquinoline (the GC standard) from the column, and this volume was routinely used for elution of silicic acid columns in this study. After the initial GC-mass spectrometry analysis, the loss of the nitrogen heterocycles was monitored by GC analyses, using the nitrogen-specific detector. Although the NPAC fraction can be analyzed by our capillary GC method, it contains materials which are nonvolatile, and these remain as contaminants in the injection port liner. The silicic acid column removed much of the browncolored materials, but it did not completely eliminate the problem of injection port contamination. The liner had to be cleaned and replaced frequently so that the resolution of the alkyl carbazole peaks could be maintained. The 2째-PANH fraction did not contain exclusively nitrogen compounds since GC analysis with the flame ionization detector showed the presence of compounds which were not visualized with the nitrogen-specific detector. In contrast, Later et al. (15, 16), who were analyzing distillates of synthetic fuels rather than crude oils, found nearly identical flame ionization and nitrogen-specific detector traces from their silicic acid column effluents. VOL. 47, 1984 on June 21, 2017 by INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY NEW DELHI http://aem.asm.org/ Downloaded from 860 FEDORAK AND WESTLAKE The 2째-PANH fraction recovered from Norman Wells crude oil after 28 days of incubation in sterile mineral medium is shown as the control in Fig. 1. This profile was identical to that of the 2째-PANH fraction from the native crude oil, indicating that none of these compounds were volatile under the incubation conditions used. Repeated attempts to detect viable microorganisms in the oil-containing controls failed, indicating that the Norman Wells crude oil contained no organisms that would attack the oil under the growth conditions used in these experiments. Twenty-six alkyl carbazoles were detected by GC-mass spectrometry, and these peaks have been grouped on the basis of their molecular weights (control, Fig. 1). Within a group of isomers, the peaks are numbered sequentially as their retention times increase. Thus, this oil contains three isomers of C1-carbazole, eight isomers of C2-carbazole, -I C3-0 FIG. 1. Comparison of alkyl carbazole-degrading capabilities of an oil-degrading enrichment culture and the carbazole-enriched culture after 28 days of incubation. The 2째-PANH fraction of Norman Wells oil was analyzed with a nitrogen-specific detector. Numbered peaks are alkyl carbazoles; others are unidentified. BQ, 7,8-Benzoquinoline (GC standard); CA, carbazole (introduced with the inoculum); C,, i alkyl carbon atoms on carbazole; X, contaminating peak. and so on. The nitrogen-specific detector readily responds to 12 ng of the GC standard 7,8-benzoquinoline (labeled BQ) (Fig. 1). The 26 numbered peaks in the control chromatogram (Fig. 1) represent 110 pLg of alkyl carbazoles found in the recovered, undegraded Norman Wells crude oil and make up 0.04% by weight of the oil. 