The assays were run with five replicates and monitored for 28 days using GC–MS. Doubly distilled hexane was used as extraction solvent for the organic phase in the chromatographic analysis. Phenanthrene solution (0.5 mg/ml) was applied as internal standard. GC–MS conditions are described by Vasconcellos et al. (2009). The clones in pools showing significant hydrocarbon degradation were evaluated individually using the same protocols as described above. 3. Results and discussion 3.1. Microbial enrichments Slices of shale were used in the microbial enrichments in an attempt to simulate the physical conditions existing in petroleum reservoirs and improve the growth of the microorganisms in the petroleum samples. The technique of microbial cell immobilization is widely used to increase biomass in anaerobic reactors (Silva et al., 2006), although the choice of an ideal support is a limiting factor in the selection of microbial populations. In this study, the microbial enrichments were developed using hexadecane or a non-biodegraded petroleum sample (P1) as carbon source, with the goal of recovering microorganisms that might be involved in hydrocarbon biodegradation. Shale was not chosen randomly as a support for microbial growth and increased DNA recovery. Previous enrichment assays using different matrices have shown that the use of shale afforded the highest level of DNA recovery (data not shown). After 120 days monitoring, intense biomass generation was observed. with a cellular density higher >108 CFU/ml for both substrates (hexadecane and P1). The same microbial enrichments showed up to 69% sulfate reduction, suggesting the presence of sulfate-reducing bacteria in both enrichments. 3.2. DNA extraction Total DNA extraction was successful for both aerobic and anaerobic enrichments, affording high molecular weight DNA (up to 40 kb) at ⩾50 ng/μl for the aerobic enrichment and ⩾100 ng/μl for the anaerobic enrichment (Fig. 2). Total DNA extraction obtained from petroleum bacterial enrichments Download full-size image Fig. 2. Total DNA extraction obtained from petroleum bacterial enrichments. Lanes M1: Lambda phage genomic DNA (λ) 25 ng; M2: λ 50 ng, M3: λ 100 ng; M4: λ 200 ng; (a) DNA from aerobic enrichment; (b) DNA from anaerobic enrichment using hexadecane as carbon source; and (c) DNA from anaerobic enrichment using P1 oil as carbon source. The use of hexadecane as a substrate in the anaerobic enrichment was more efficient for the recovery of hydrocarbon-biodegrading bacteria than the enrichment using P1 oil and resulted in a larger amount of DNA recovered (Fig. 2). In contrast, no difference in DNA yield was observed in the aerobic enrichment using hexadecane or P1 oil. DNA samples obtained using both carbon sources were pooled and used for diversity analysis. For the construction of the metagenomic library, DNA samples from both the aerobic and anaerobic enrichments were pooled and treated as a single sample. 3.3. 