Ecotoxicity Bioassays. (A) Earthworm Survival Test. The common earthworm species, Eisenia foetida, was used to determine acute toxicity of the oily soils before, during, and after biotreatment. Animals were obtained from Carolina Biological Supply Company (Burlington, NC) and held in uncontaminated soil until testing. The assay methods were similar to those described in an EPA protocol (52). Ten adult animals (five replicates) were placed into 200 g (dry wt) of soil in 1-L wide-mouth jars with loose fitting lids. The LC50 for each oily soil was estimated using five concentrations of bioremediated soil (100, 50, 25, 12.5, 6.5, and 0%) prepared with control (oil-free) Norwood or Norwood/Baccto soil. The soil water content was adjusted to 12−18% for the Norwood and to 30% for the Norwood/Baccto soils. Surviving earthworms were counted after a 14-day incubation at room temperature under constant fluorescent lighting conditions. The LC50 end point was calculated using probit techniques. (B) Microtox Solid Phase Assay. The Microtox Analyzer M500 and solid-phase test kit (Microbics Corp., Carlsbad, CA) were used to evaluate the response of the luminescent bacteria (Photobacterium phosphoreum) to oily soils. The test methods employed were described in the Microbics Manual (53). Soil dilutions were prepared (0.3 g/3 mL of Microtox diluent), incubated for 20 min with reconstituted lyophilized bacteria, and then sampled for substrate-induced (Microtox ATP reagents) photoluminescence activity. The EC50 soil dilution that inhibits 50% of the light output relative to the control (hydrocarbon-free soil) was calculated for each soil. (C) Plant Seed Germination and Growth. The methodology used in these seed germination/plant growth studies was similar to that outlined in the OECD Guideline for Testing of Chemicals (54). The effects of untreated and bioremediated oily soils were determined in corn, wheat, and oat species. Corn (Zea mays), wheat (Triticum aestivum), and oat (Avena sativa) were purchased from Carolina Biological Supply Company (Burlington, NC), and seeds were stored at room temperature until used in germination tests. Oily soils or oil-free (control) soils were dispensed (ca. 80 g/cell) into molded plastic trays (57 cm long × 27 cm wide × 6 cm high) containing 36 cells/tray. Seeds (5 per cell) were placed 1−1.5 cm below the soil surface in each of 20 cells (100 seeds) for each soil treatment. Seed cultures were exposed to 12-h light/dark cycles at a soil surface light intensity of 310−350 lm provided by six 34-W white fluorescent lamps. The room temperature varied from 20 to 23 °C. Soil treatments were kept moist (ca. 30% of the soil mixture holding capacity) by spraying the soil surface with unchlorinated well water. The percent of seeds germinated before and after (at 8 and 10 months) bioremediation was determined after 21 days. Plant foliar and root dry weights were also measured from all germinated seeds. Plants from a cell were removed as a group, washed to remove soil particles, and then dried at 120 °C for 3 h. The average dry weight/plant was calculated for all plants, and incompletely germinated seeds were not included in the plant dry weight. 