Field investigations via molecular phylogenetic monitoring of a sulfate-reducing community incubated in situ for more than 500 days with oil contaminated sediments from 20 m water depth in a Mediterranean coastal area revealed that many of the most abundant sequences were closely related (94–98% similarity) to several alkane-degrading SRB members of the δ-Proteobacteria. At the lower and anoxic sediments layers, alkanes ranging from C17 to C30 were significantly removed. Of all the clones retrieved from the community, 41–54% fell within the genera Desulfococcus, Desulfonema and Desulfosarcina of the family Desulfobacteraceae ( Miralles et al. 2007). In addition to the Desulfobacteraceae, two novel sulfate-reducing strains affiliated with the family Syntrophobacteraceae within the δ-Proteobacteria were recently isolated from oilfield production water and from an oily sludge. The two strains, Desulfoglaeba alkanexedens ALDCT and Lake, are phylogenetically close to each other and are able to grow by complete oxidation of C6–C12n-alkanes ( Davidova et al. 2006). Thermophilic alkane-degrading sulfate-reducers are very rare; only one isolate has been reported in the literature. Using sediments from Guaymas basin (a site of hydrothermal activities in the Gulf of California), Rueter et al. (1994) developed an anoxic enrichment with sulfate reducing activity in the presence of crude oil at 60 °C. Subsequently, axenic culture referred to as Desulfothermus naphthae TD3T was isolated from this enrichment which was capable of oxidizing n-alkanes. Phylogenetic analysis showed that the thermophilic sulfate-reducer strain TD3T forms a distinct cluster within the family Desulfohalobiaceae. The strain is closely related to another thermophilic sulfate-reducer, Desulfothermus okinawensis TFISO9T (AB264617), isolated from a deep-sea hydrothermal field at the Yonaguni Knoll IV (Southern Okinawa Trough) with 16S rRNA sequence similarity of 96% (Nunoura et al. 2007). To date, Desulfothermus naphthae TD3T and Desulfothermus okinawensis TFISO9T are the sole representative species of the genus Desulfothermus. Other genera included in the Desulfohalobiaceae are Desulfohalobium, Desulfonatronovibrio and Desulfonauticus. Anaerobic oxidation of alkanes is not restricted to members of the δ-Proteobacteria ( Fig. 2). The thermophilic propane-oxidizer clone Propane60-GuB, retrieved from Guaymas Basin sediment, is a member of the genus Desulfotomaculum within the Peptococcaceae (Firmicutes) ( Kniemeyer et al. 2007). Anaerobic degradation of branched and cyclic alkanes has been rarely investigated under sulfate-reducing conditions. The biodegradation of ethylcyclopentane (ECP) by a sulfate-reducing community derived from an aquifer contaminated by hydrocarbons has nevertheless been reported (Rios-Hernandez et al. 2003). Molecular analysis of the community revealed a diverse collection of phylotypes belonging to genera Syntrophobacter (δ-Proteobacteria) and Desulfotomaculum (Peptococcaceae, Firmicutes) as well as members of the Cytophaga-Flexibacter-Bacteroides group. The authors speculated that the sulfate-reducer phylogenetically affiliated with the genus Desulfotomaculum would have been responsible for the degradation of ECP ( Rios-Hernandez et al., 2003 ; Bonin et al., 2004). Other studies have indirectly indicated the presence of microbial communities responsible for degrading volatile alicyclic alkanes (constituents of gasoline and natural gas condensate) under sulfate-reducing conditions (Townsend et al. 2004). Another important group of sulfidogens is represented by hyperthermophilic archaeal members of the genus Archaeoglobus and the order Thermococcales. These strictly anaerobic microorganisms mostly thrive in hydrothermal environments and in subsurface thermophillic petroleum reservoirs ( Stetter et al., 1987; Beeder et al., 1994; Magot et al., 2000; Miroshnichenko et al., 2001 ; Gittel et al., 2009). 