2010). Such symbiotic association between hydrocarbon-degraders and anammox bacteria can be extrapolated from environments such as petroleum reservoirs where anammox bacteria have also been identified as potential contributors to the nitrogen recyclers (Li et al. 2010). It should be reminded that Geobacter species are often the predominant microorganisms found in hydrocarbon-contaminated environments in which Fe(III)-reduction occur ( Zwolinski et al. 2000) and given that Fe(III)-reduction coupled to alkanes degradation has not yet been unequivocally demonstrated despite some experimental attempts (So and Young 2001), it is reasonable to assume that Geobacter spp. related to those identified by Musat et al. (2010) may be able to accomplish this task. The research interest in hydrocarbons utilization by sulfidogenic microorganisms stems from observations of sulfide formation during maturation of oil reservoirs. Indeed, these microorganisms have always been identified or isolated from hydrocarbon-rich environments such as in petroleum deposits, hydrocarbon seeps, methane hydrates, petroleum-rich hydrothermal sediments, underground oil storage tanks and hydrocarbon-contaminated sediments (Magot et al., 2000; Watanabe et al., 2000 ; Dhillon et al., 2003). Phylogenetic analysis based on 16S rRNA and functional genes suggest that sulfate-reducing bacterial (SRB) communities retrieved from these environments are predominantly affiliated with members of the family Desulfobacteraceae within the δ-Proteobacteria. Most members of this family are strict anaerobes that perform complete oxidation of organic compounds. In contrast to nitrate reducers, sulfate-reducers that anaerobically oxidize saturated hydrocarbons are likely indigenous to hydrocarbon-rich environments ( Table 3). Eight mesophilic alkane-degrading sulfate-reducers have been isolated and reported in the literature. Among them, cultured members of the Desulfococcus/Desulfatibacillum cluster including Desulfococcus oleovorans Hxd3 from oil-water separator ( Aeckersberg et al. 1991), strain Pnd3 from petroleum-contaminated marine sediment (Aeckersberg et al. 1998), Desulfatibacillum alkenivorans AK-01 from petroleum-contaminated estuarine sediments ( So and Young 1999b) and Desulfatibacillum aliphaticivorans CV2803T from hydrocarbon-polluted marine sediments (Cravo-Laureau et al. 2004) are able to grow by oxidizing n-alkanes ranging from C12 to C20. The n-hexane and n-decane oxidizing SRB strain PL2 was recently isolated from a p-xylene degrading sulfate-reducing community. This member of the family Desulfobacteraceae shared >97% 16S rRNA gene sequence similarities with the aromatic hydrocarbons degrading strain oXyS1 and with other members of the Desulfosarcina such as Desulfosarcina variabilis and Desulfosarcina cetonicum ( Higashioka et al. 2009). The alkane-oxidizing SRB, strain BuS5, isolated from marine hydrocarbon seeps is only able to grow with propane and butane. This strain clusters within the Desulfosarcina/Desulfococcus, however no genus designation has been given so far ( Kniemeyer et al. 2007). In addition, enrichment cultures have been obtained from Gulf of Mexico sediments grown with butane as the sole substrate at 12 °C. Potentially cold-adapted SRB clone Butane12-GMe, the dominant bacteria, fell into the Desulfosarcina/Desulfococcus cluster and was most closely related to strain BuS5 ( Kniemeyer et al. 2007). More recently, Desulfobacteraceae-affiliated microorganisms capable of degradation of short-chain n-alkanes appeared to be the predominant members of mesophilic propane and pentane oxidizing sulfate-reducing enrichments derived from non-marine sediments. Surprisingly, most of the clones retrieved from these enrichment cultures shared only 88–95% with strain BuS5, indicating the existence of a probably large diversity of sulfate-reducing microorganisms involved in the biodegradation of short-chain n-alkanes ( Savage et al. 2010). 