Knowledge about their electron donors under in situ conditions is scarce. For instance, Archaeoglobus-related species are not known to utilize alkanes. Nevertheless, direct evidence shows that Archaeoglobus fulgidus strain VC-16 that was previously isolated from heated sea floor at Volcano, Italy ( Stetter et al. 1987) and later from hot oil field waters in the North Sea (Beeder et al. 1994) is able to reduce thiosulfate coupled with the anaerobic oxidation of n-alkenes (C12:1–C21:1) at 70 °C (Khelifi et al. 2010). To date only some mesophilic sulfate-reducing, alkane-degrading bacteria have been reported to be able to utilize alkenes (Cravo-Laureau et al. 2004). However, it has not yet been completely ruled out that members of the genus Archaeoglobus would be able to oxidize alkanes. In addition, strain VC-16 can also metabolize a wide range of fatty acids (C4–C18) with thiosulfate as the electron acceptor (Khelifi et al. 2010). This latter capability not only confirms the formerly predicted and controversial β-oxidation pathway in this strain ( Klenk et al. 1997), but also indicate that Archaeoglobus-related organisms may represent important partners in complex microbial communities. Hyperthermophilic archaeal of the order Thermococcales are actually represented by three genera: Paleococcus, Pyrococcus and Thermococcus (Ribosomal Database Project Release 10; rdp.cme.msu.edu) (Cole et al. 2009). Physiologically, most members of Thermococcales are organotrophs that gain metabolic energy via fermentation of complex organic compounds such as peptides or yeast extract ( Bertoldo and Antranikian 2006). They all share a common physiological feature of reducing elemental sulfur (S0) to sulfide (Magot et al. 2000). It is worth noting that members belonging to the genus Thermococcus are frequently found more abundant in samples retrieved from hot oil reservoirs ( Orphan et al., 2000 ; Nazina et al., 2006) and in hydrothermal habitats compared to the Paleococcus and Pyrococcus species ( Lee et al. 2008). Consequently, Thermococcus species are considered to play a significant role in the metabolic activities of complex microbial consortia occurring within such natural high temperature habitats ( Lee et al. 2008). However, no members of the Thermococcus were known to utilize alkanes until very recently when the growth of Thermococcus sibiricus at 78 °C was shown to be stimulated by hexadecane. Reproducible growth was observed after successive transfers of T. sibiricus on medium amended with hexadecane as the sole source of carbon and energy ( Mardanov et al. 2009). Elemental sulfur as an electron acceptor is not absolutely required but stimulates growth. The strain, which was isolated from a non-water flooded hot oil reservoir located in Western Siberia (Miroshnichenko et al. 2001), did not grow in the presence of aromatic hydrocarbons. Sulfate and thiosulfate are not utilized as alternative electron acceptors. 