Samples DW3s, 308s, W18s, VP13i and W18d were collected with a peristaltic pump, while a bladder type pump was used for DW3d, W6i, 308i, W18i, 309d, 309i and 309s (see Table 1 for details). Groundwater was flushed from wells until the pH, temperature, conductivity and dissolved oxygen concentrations were stable. Samples were collected in sterile 2-l glass bottles. For samples destined for anaerobic cultivation, bottles were flushed with nitrogen prior to and during filling; all the bottles were filled to the brim and sealed with polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) lined thick rubber stoppers. Then they were immediately refrigerated and protected from light. For DNA extraction, groundwater was filtered on site with a hand-powered pump, and micro-organisms were collected on 0·2 μm pore size membrane filters (Durapore, 3M). The filters were placed in guanidinum thiocyanate buffer (Boom et al. 1990) and kept at 4°C until required. Anaerobic microcosms were prepared in triplicate in an anaerobic cabinet, by dispensing 50 ml of groundwater into 110 ml serum bottles that were crimp-sealed with thick butyl stoppers. The bottles were aseptically evacuated and flushed with nitrogen, leaving approximately 1·4 bars overpressure. They were then spiked with benzene to give a concentration of 64 mg l−1 plus the concentration already present (i.e. if a groundwater sample had 10 mg l−1 of benzene, after spiking it would have 74 mg l−1), and incubated at 12°C (representing the in situ temperature) in the dark for 537 days. Aerobic microcosms were prepared by dispensing 18 ml of the groundwater into 110 ml serum bottles, spiking with benzene to give a concentration of 80 mg l−1 plus the concentration already present, and crimp-sealing with PTFE-lined silicone septa. The amount of oxygen in this volume of headspace had previously been shown to be sufficient to allow complete aerobic degradation of benzene at this concentration without depletion of oxygen (Fahy 2003). Gas chromatography was used to measure the benzene concentration in microcosms with a Unicam 610 Series GC fitted with a 4 mm internal diameter, glass packed column (10% apiezon on chromosorb W) and a flame ionization detector (FID). The temperatures were at the injector 250°C, column 155°C and detector 250°C, and detection was set at medium sensitivity. Hydrogen was used as carrier gas at a flow rate of 1·0 ml min−1. Autoclaved microcosms were used as controls throughout the experiment. Standards and controls all had the same liquid/headspace ratio, and were held at the same temperature as the test samples. Hydrocarbon analyses The extraction procedure and GC-MS analysis settings have been previously described (Coulon et al. 2007). Briefly, 20 ml of sample was extracted with solid phase extraction tubes (SPE Supelclean EnviTM-18; Supelco, Bellefonte, PA, USA) and eluted with a mixture of hexane: dichloromethane (1 : 1). Extracts were diluted to appropriate concentrations for gas chromatography analysis. Deuterated alkanes and polyaromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) served as internal standards and were added to the extracts at 0·5 and 0·4 μg ml−1, respectively. The quantification was carried out by GC-MS using a Thermo Trace gas chromatograph coupled to a DSQ mass spectrometer operated at 70 eV in positive ion mode. Chromatography was performed with a fused silica capillary column (30 × 0·25 mm internal diameter) coated with RTX-5MS (0·25 μm film thickness; Restek Corporation, Sounderton, UK) with helium as the carrier gas. A sample volume of 1 μl was applied in splitless injection mode. The oven temperature was programmed at 85°C for 2 min and then increased to 310°C at 20°C min−1 and held at this temperature for 30 min. The mass spectrometer used the full scan mode (range m/z 50–650) for quantitative analysis of target saturated hydrocarbons and PAHs. 