The possible role of anaerobes other than aceticlastic methanogens should also be considered, but more tentatively, owing to more distant relationships and a less certain phylogeny–physiology connection. For example, several clones related to the facultative iron-reducer Rhodoferax ferrireducens (Finneran et al. 2003) were identified that have been seen in hydrocarbon-contaminated environments. Interestingly, Fahy et al. (2006) noted that Rhodoferax sp. was dominant in a SIReN groundwater sample (308S), but after aerobic incubation it could no longer be detected, suggesting that in situ it is either anaerobic or microaerophilic. Parallels can be drawn with groundwater DW3d discussed above and 309d, the groundwater in the deeper consolidated sandstone aquifer. Both have methanogenic populations and high levels of methane, and both have aerobic bacterial populations. In the case of 309d these are primarily pseudomonads, renowned for their ability to degrade aromatic hydrocarbons under aerobic, microaerophilic and nitrate-reducing conditions. The abundance in well W18i of clones related to facultative denitrifers, e.g. Acidovorax species, similarly suggests that degradation of aromatic compounds could be coupled to aerobic respiration or nitrate reduction. Fahy et al. (2006) observed abundant Acidovorax species in an aerobic benzene-degrading microcosm, and we have also shown that they incorporate labelled carbon from 13C-benzene into their DNA (Aburto 2007), demonstrating that the dominant microbes in groundwater W18i can degrade benzene aerobically. Combined use of oxygen and nitrate should also be considered, in which oxygen is incorporated into the ring structure of the aromatic compound using mono-oxygenases, but nitrate is the electron acceptor (Major et al. 1988). Faster benzene biodegradation in the presence of both oxygen and nitrate than with oxygen or nitrate alone in batch cultures have been observed elsewhere (Major et al. 1988; Alvarez and Vogel 1991). However, the nitrate concentration reported in the well W18i is below the limit of detection of 1 mg l−1, and no oxygen was detected. But it should be noted that the highly alkaline well W18d, which lies 8 m below W18i has a nitrate and oxygen concentration of 2·1 and 2·57 mg l–1, respectively. While in the uncontaminated well W18s, which lies just 3 m above W18i, there is a nitrate and oxygen concentration of 2·7 and 2·22 mg l−1, respectively. This implies a rather narrow benzene plume, and the possibility of a slow but steady supply of one or both of these terminal electron acceptors (and reactants in the case of oxygen), albeit at low concentrations, to the groundwater around well W18i. Accurate data on groundwater flow and benzene plume distribution would help to address this question. Many factors other than oxygen availability affect benzene degradation. The highly alkaline groundwater sample W18d, for example, has relatively high levels of dissolved oxygen (2·57 mg l−1), but it is the only sample in which benzene degradation has not been demonstrated in the laboratory. It is also probable that there is no benzene degradation in situ, because oxidation of benzene would result in a much greater depletion of oxygen as seen in similarly contaminated wells. Furthermore, the dominant microbe is a Hydrogenophaga species that has 98·5% 16S rRNA sequence similarity to the most abundant clone sequences from a shallow aquifer in the US that is also very alkaline (pH 12·8) (Roadcap et al. 2005), but which is not known to be contaminated with benzene, suggesting that the dominant organism in well W18d is a high-pH specialist rather than a benzene specialist. Moreover, an isolated representative of this Hydrogenophaga (strain Pd1, AM980998) did not degrade benzene (data not shown). We conclude that very low concentrations of oxygen are sufficient to allow in-situ biodegradation of benzene in the SIReN, possibly by co-operation between aerobes and anaerobes. 