The BTH desulfurization pathways of Gordonia sp. strain 213E (8), Rhodococcus sp. strain T09 (22), Paenibacillus sp. strain A11-2 (14), Sinorhizobium sp. strain KT55 (31), Rhodococcus sp. strain WU-K2R (13), and Rhodococcus sp. strain KT462 (30) have been elucidated. However, the desulfurization of both BTH and DBT by a single bacterial strain has only been reported for the thermophilic bacterium Paenibacillus sp. strain A11-2 and the mesophilic bacterium Rhodococcus sp. strain KT462. As shown in this paper, M. goodii X7B, a facultative thermophilic bacterium, can also grow with either BTH or DBT as the sole sulfur source. The desulfurization pathway of Sinorhizobium sp. strain KT55, Paenibacillus sp. strain A11-2, and Rhodococcus sp. strain KT462 is as follows: BTH→BTH sulfoxide→BTH sulfone→benzo(e)(1,2)oxathiin S-oxide→o-hydroxystyrene. The BTH degradation routes in Gordonia sp. strain 213E and Rhodococcus sp. strain T09 were found to be the same, and the deduced pathway of BTH was similar to that of the three bacteria mentioned above except for the last step, that is, the end product of BTH desulfurization was not o-hydroxystyrene but, rather, 2-(2′-hydroxyphenyl)ethan-1-al. In an analysis of BTH metabolites of strain X7B, benzo(e)(1,2)oxathiin S,S-dioxide and o-hydroxystyrene were both observed. Therefore, we postulated that M. goodii X7B shares the same BTH degradation pathway as Sinorhizobium sp. strain KT55, Paenibacillus sp. strain A11-2, and Rhodococcus sp. strain KT462 (14, 30, 31). It was interesting that the three BTH- and DBT-desulfurizing strains had the same BTH degradation steps (Fig. 4). This clearly indicates that there are some common characteristics among them. However, it has been reported that IGTS8 cannot utilize BTH as a sole sulfur source (10), suggesting that X7B may carry a novel system for the desulfurization of heterocyclic sulfur-containing xenobiotics. More detailed analyses of the purified enzymes and genes involved in BTH degradation by strain X7B would provide a further corroborative explanation for the biodesulfurization of both BTH and DBT by a single bacterial strain. Most of the sulfur species in gasoline are a result of fluid catalytic cracking of gas oils or residuum materials that are relatively rich in sulfur. 