The day 27 data (8Fig. 8b) show that diesel treatment is the major source of variation, with contaminated soils completely separated from control soils along PC 1. PC 1 has a high R2 value of 0·67. Samples separated according to soil type, for the contaminated soils only, along PC 2. There is no separation of soil type in the control soils. The day 62 data (8Fig. 8c) follow the same pattern as for the day 27 data. Diesel treatment is again the major source of variation, with contaminated soils separated from control soils along PC 1. Contaminated samples only were separated with respect to soil type along PC 2; BY was completely separated from the other soil types, but IN and CW were not separated. The control soils formed a tight cluster and were not separated at all by soil type, as for the day 27 data. The day 102 data (8Fig. 8d) were separated by treatment along a combination of PC 1 and PC 2. The amount of spread between individual data points was similar for the control and contaminated soils. The individual PLFAs that caused the most variation along each axis were also determined by PCA. At day 27, the PLFAs most significant in causing separation along PC 1 (i.e. separation according to diesel addition) were 18 : 1ω9, 18 : 2ω6 and 17 : 1ω8 (associated with the contaminated soils), and 19 : 0cy (associated with the control soils). Examining the PCA for the day 63 and day 102 data shows that 18 : 1ω9 remains the lipid with the highest loading associated with the contaminated soils. The PLFAs 15 : 0 and 16 : 0 also appear associated with the contaminated soils for days 63 and 102. The duration of the experiment was clearly sufficient for the initial, rapid phase of bioremediation to be completed for IN and CW; the rate of removal of oil had dropped almost to zero by the end of the experiment (Fig. 1). It can be seen that diesel was not degraded as quickly in BY soil; BY has a sandier texture than the other two soils, and contains a lower proportion of organic carbon and microbial biomass. The lower degradation rate of diesel is presumably caused by the lower microbial biomass at the start of the experiment. One consequence is that degradation had not finished in BY by the conclusion of the bioremediation treatment; evidence for this is given both by the rate of loss of oil (Fig. 1), and by the continuing elevation of soil respiration over background (control) levels (Fig. 2). This is useful insofar as it allows the comparison of the two soils in which bioremediation appears to have been completed to one in which oil degradation is still occurring, although at a lower rate than at the beginning of the experiment. It should be noted that the total proportion of oil removed (up to about 60%) is not especially high. A more active bioremediation treatment (for example, enhancing oxygen availability) might have resulted in degradation of a greater percentage of diesel (Ritter and Scarborough 1995). However, maximizing the extent of bioremediation was not one of the aims of this study. 