Consequently, only the GN data were used for further data analysis, and all further results presented in this paper are those from GN data only. GN carbon sources. PCA of the GN carbon source data shows a clear separation of samples with respect to time, soil type and treatment (Fig. 5). The most important factor with respect to grouping the data would appear to be incubation time. The non-incubated (day 1) samples are separated from the other samples along a composite axis based on principal components 1 and 2. The incubated diesel-contaminated samples are also separated from the incubated control samples along this same axis (approximately equivalent to x=–y). Finally, samples are separated according to soil type for the diesel-contaminated samples only along a second composite axis perpendicular to the first (approximately equivalent to x=y). The data were re-analysed by PCA for each sampling date, separately, in order to clarify the effect of diesel on the sole carbon source utilization profiles, i.e. without including incubation time as an extra potential source of variation within the data, which might mask the effects of experimental treatment. The results from these separate analyses are shown in Fig. 6(a–d). No obvious differences were observed between soil types at day one, although CW tended to have higher PC1 scores. Biolog CLPPs at all other sampling times showed clear separation according to both soil type and treatment with diesel. It is arguable which time showed the greatest effect of oil addition. Day 27 showed a complete separation of control and treated soils for BY and IN along PC 1, although not for CW (6Fig. 6b). In comparison, by day 103, the separation caused by diesel treatment was at its most obvious; all the control soils clustered together, and were totally separated from all the treated soils. However, the separation was along PC2, and therefore did not account for as great a proportion of the variance as if it had been on PC1. The trend of similarity between different soil types is clearer to follow. There was little difference between soil types at day one. By day 27, there was a developing effect of soil type along PC2; it is clear that diesel-treated soils are more variable along PC 2 than the control soils. By day 62, the control soils, with the exception of one outlying point, were more similar than the diesel-treated soils, lying close together in multivariate space. The effects were clearest at day 103; the control soils were now separated from the contaminated soils along PC2, and soil types were completely separated along PC1 for the contaminated soils only. PLFA profiles PCA of the PLFA concentration data shows that there is complete separation along PC 1 (Fig. 7) between control and diesel-treated soils for the incubated samples, i.e. diesel-contaminated soils clustered with controls at day 1 but were separated on all subsequent dates. There was some separation according to soil type along PC 2 for the incubated contaminated soils only; BY soils were distinct from CW, and IN soils were intermediate, overlapping with both BY and CW. As for the Biolog data, PCA was carried out for each sampling date separately. 