The components searched for were toluene, ethylbenzene, n-nonane (n-C9), n-undecane (n-C11) and n-tridecane (n-C13). Peak areas and retention times were compared to reference standards. The injections were done in triplicate. Three different Gram-negative, rod-shaped bacterial species were isolated from soil and identified at Oswaldo Cruz Institute as Burkholderia cepacia, Klebsiella pneumoniae and Pseudomonas alcaligenes. Considering that the soil originated from a hydrocarbon-contamination free region and the exposure time to gasoline was 12 days, it is possible to conclude that the experimental conditions used in the isolation were extremely selective. According to Ridgway et al. (14), among 121 bacterial strains isolated from groundwater, able to use gasoline as carbon and energy source, 18.4% were as Pseudomonas putida, 1.6% as Pseudomonas alcaligenes and 0.41% as Pseudomonas cepacia. As also suggested by Ridgway et al. (14), the main advantages of using vapor-phase growth are the facility and the speed. Meanwhile, gasoline contains only 10 to 20% of relatively non-volatile compounds (> C10) (8). Thus, it is sufficient to ensure the isolation of microorganisms able to degrade these compounds, which are considered of primary concern in current environmental regulations. As shown in Table 3, the methodology employed for the isolation was quite efficient in obtaining cultures capable to degrade compounds less volatile than many aromatic constituents. These results are similar to those obtained by Ridgway et al. (14). After isolation, batch soil microcosms were tested to evaluate the capacity of gasoline biodegradation in several treatment systems. The soil was not sterilized in order to reproduce the natural environment. Besides, soil sterilization can modify its physical structure, chemical composition or catalytic properties (12, 1) and the indigenous soil microorganisms constitute a heterogeneous microbial community necessary to increase the efficiency of gasoline biodegradation process (11). The results of cellular growth and degradation are shown in Table 3. According to these results, systems constituted only of indigenous soil microflora (System 1), supplemented with inorganic nutrient (NH4NO3) and oxygen source (H2O2), presented a uniformity in the percentile reduction of the gasoline components (around 50%). The Brazilian gasoline contains 22% of ethanol which is easily utilized as substrate. According to Corseuil and Alvarez (4), preliminary laboratorial tests showed that ethanol might increase the BTX solubilization in water, affecting the degradation of these compounds. Considering the results obtained in treatment systems 2, 3, 4 and 5, constituted of indigenous microflora and pure culture inoculum, it can be concluded that gasoline degradation was not expressive for all of them. Meanwhile, an inoculum of mixed cultures, (system 7), resulted in an increase in the biodegradation percentile of the gasoline constituents, a fact probably related to the synergistic effect produced by the combination of these two bacterial species. Comparing the treatment systems employing more than one pure culture inoculum, system 13, constituted of B. cepacia, P. alcaligenes and P. putida, showed clearly the best degradation percentile results of gasoline components from n-undecane to n-tridecane and a decrease in the cell density. The low cellular density does not imply that a compound can not be cometabolized or syntrophicaly utilized. It is possible to suppose also that the increase of a specific population has caused an imbalance in the community through the competition for the physical space, nutrients and water, reducing to small levels the population of microorganisms that had the best performance in the biodegradation process. The survival might be indeed affected by inoculum size. The ability of the inoculum to survive was checked by comparing bacterial counts in both inoculated and uninoculated samples. Systems constituted of inoculum of K. pneumoniae were discarded because it is a pathogenic agent. 