Although small amounts of growth were observed in the absence of nitrate, they were not associated with benzene degradation and were probably due to nutrient carryover from the preculture. After the degradation test, the purity of the culture was confirmed by PCR-DGGE analysis (data not shown). In order to investigate if benzene was anaerobically mineralized (converted to CO2) by strains DN11 and AN9, radiorespirometry experiments were conducted, using [14C]benzene under denitrifying conditions. Table 3 shows that large fractions of radioactivity initially added as [14C]benzene were recovered in the CO2 trap. In this experiment, significant amounts of radioactivity were not recovered in the CO2 trap in the absence of nitrate (data not shown), showing that benzene mineralization was coupled to denitrification. In conclusion, the present study successfully used the RNA-SIP technique to demonstrate that the Azoarcus population is involved in benzene degradation in the aquifer. However, among the five isolated strains affiliated with the Azoarcus phylotype, only two strains were capable of anaerobic benzene degradation. These data indicate that functional heterogeneity exists among strains with the Azoarcus phylotype, and more specific molecular markers than the 16S rRNA gene will be necessary for discriminating benzene-degrading Azoarcus populations from other closely related Azoarcus populations in the gasoline-contaminated aquifer. Although several studies have obtained enrichment cultures degrading benzene under anaerobic conditions (10, 20, 22, 35, 42, 49, 51, 52), no study has succeeded in isolating benzene-degrading strains from them. We have also attempted to isolate anaerobic benzene-degrading bacteria by using agar plates containing minimal medium after enrichment in liquid cultures from gasoline-contaminated groundwater; however, all these trials were in vain. In contrast, the present study combined RNA-SIP with DGGE screening of heterotrophic bacteria, resulting in the isolation of two denitrifying benzene-degrading bacteria. Accordingly, we suggest that RNA-SIP identification coupled to phylogenetic screening of nonselective isolates facilitates the isolation of enrichment/isolation-resistant microorganisms with a specific function. 