The PCR program was as follows: denaturation at 95 °C for 5 min; 30 cycles of 1 min at 95 °C; annealing for 1 min at 57 °C; and extension for 90 s at 72 °C; followed by a final extension at 72 °C for 10 min. The amplification products (1500 pbs) were routinely analyzed by horizontal gel electrophoresis in 0.8% agarose gel in Tris–Borate–EDTA (TBE), followed by ethidium bromide staining and visualization under UV light. Lambda phage DNA digested with PstI restriction enzyme was included on the gel in order to confirm the size of the amplified product. PCR products from the extracted bands were purified by GFX™ PCR DNA and Gel Band Purification Kit (Amersham Biosciences) as per the manufacturer's instructions. Species were grouped by restriction fragment length polymorphism analysis (RFLP) of the 16S rDNA with HaeIII, AluI, and HhaI endonucleases to reduce the number of isolates by identifying duplicates. The 20 μl restriction digestion mixture contained 1 U of enzyme, 10× restriction enzyme buffer, and 0.5–1.0 μg DNA. The mixture was incubated at 37 °C for 2 h and the reaction products were analyzed on a 3% agarose gel in TBE, followed by SYBR Gold (Invitrogen) staining and visualization under UV light. Finally, 16S rDNA sequences from the different restriction profile groups were obtained in an ABI Prism™ 3100 Genetic Analyzer (Perking Elmer) and identification was made using the Gapped BLAST database search program facility of the National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) [1]. Basic morphological information of samples was obtained by phase contrast microscopy observations under a Nikon Eclipse E-200 microscope with a Nikon CoolPix 990 digital camera. Bacterial viability was analyzed by staining the cells with propidium iodide (PI) and SYTO 9 green fluorescent nucleic acid stain (LIVE/DEAD BacLight Bacterial Viability Kit, Molecular Probes) at a wavelength of 488 nm and 568 nm excitation, respectively, and at 530 nm (green) or 630 nm (red) emission. In the presence of both stains, bacteria with intact cell membranes appear fluorescent green, whereas membrane-compromised bacteria appear red [20]. Cell activity was analyzed by incubating the cells for 15 min at 30 °C in a carboxyfluorescein diacetate (CFDA) solution [24] at a final concentration of 30 μM. Cells were then washed twice with distilled water and observed directly under the CLSM microscope at a wavelength of 488 nm excitation and 530 nm emission. Cell membrane potential was analyzed by staining the cells with rhodamine 123, which is a vital stain that selectively accumulates in cells with an intact membrane potential and has been widely employed in prokaryotic cell studies [33]. Samples were incubated at 30 °C for 15 min in a 0.2 mg/ml final concentration solution of rhodamine 123 (Sigma), washed twice with distilled water, and observed under CLSM at a wavelength of 514 nm excitation and 563 nm emission. A Leica TCS-SP2-AOBS confocal laser-scanning microscope was used. The images obtained were mixed using the Leica Confocal Software. Three products and dosages were used in the bioremediation approach. The first product was S200, an oleophilic fertilizer distributed by IEP (http://www.iepeurope.com) and selected to enhance nutrient levels. It is a relatively new product and is listed as a bioremediation agent in the National Oil and Hazardous Substances Pollution Contingency Plan (NCP), USA. Its composition (urea, phosphoric ester, water, oleic acid, and glycol ether) boosts emulsification, thereby enabling dilution to take place. As previously tested in our lab, S200 improves hydrocarbon biodegradation (data not shown). The product was injected and infiltrated at appropriate dosages, according to the total amount of hydrocarbons present in the different areas of the subsoil and adjusted to a C:N ratio of 10:1. The second product used was diluted hydrogen peroxide (250 mg/l), which was applied in continuous injections that completed an amount congruent with the stechiometric oxygen demand of the hydrocarbons polluting the site (approximately 2500 kg; see Section 3). This dosification was adjusted weekly to achieve and sustain dissolved oxygen levels of 6–8 mg/l in the polluted groundwater. The third compound was Bioversal HC, a biodegradable chemical surfactant commonly used in hydrocarbon remediation and distributed in Spain by IEP Europe. It was infiltrated from trenches to “wash” the hydrocarbons sorbed in the unsaturated zone. The dosages were selected on the basis of our previous experiences at other field sites and on manufacturers' recommendations (1 kg of surfactant per 10 kg of hydrocarbons to be desorbed). The field site studied was the subsoil of an old metal-working factory, located in northern Spain and polluted by different mixtures of hydrocarbons released over several decades of industrial activity (Fig. 