The pH ranged from 6.5 to 8 and average conductivity of 600 μS/cm were also measured. Finally, subsoil temperatures ranged between 22 °C and 26 °C (treatment was implemented during the summer). Plate counting revealed a remarkable increase in the microbial populations during the first 2–3 months of biostimulant injection in all the zones sampled (Fig. 3a–c). However, bacteria numbers subsequently declined, especially those growing in DM medium. The noticeably lower values corresponding to the samples collected during month 4 can be partially accounted for by a dilution effect, due to an elevation of the water table following a rainy period. After completing the process, the CM and DM microbial populations returned to their initial values (Fig. 3a,b) and even fell to below initial levels (Fig. 3c). Average values of samples obtained from the monitoring wells (Fig. 3d) clearly confirmed the same trend as described above: a noticeable increase of microbial populations at the beginning of treatment, followed by a decline at the end of the intervention to levels that were slightly lower than the initial values. Selective enrichment enabled a significant number of hydrocarbon-degraders from the four zones to be isolated. Within these strains, further selection was carried out based on two criteria: persistence throughout the enrichment procedure and the presence of the same microorganisms in several samples of the same or different zones. The most abundant strains isolated after plate-counting of the successive enrichments were grouped by RFLP analysis and characterized by conventional microbiological determinations (gram, oxidase test, morphology, mobility) prior to undergoing detailed identification. Sequence analysis of 16S bacterial ribosomal DNA of the isolates detected different bacterial genera throughout the process (Table 1). The most widely represented genera with respect to the species encountered (Table 1) were Pseudomonas, followed by Acinetobacter, Microbacterium, Ralstonia, Achromobacter, Micrococcus, Ochrobactrum, and Rhodococcus. Further analysis of the different species from the genera listed in Table 1, identified Achromobacter xylosoxidans (Accession DQ303927), Acinetobacter sp. (Accession DQ303926), Microbacterium oxydans (Accession AY785738), Ochrobactrum anthropi (Accession AY776289), and Pseudomonas putida (Accession DQ112329) as the most common species isolated throughout the monitorization of the different zones. On the other hand, CLSM observations from direct in situ samples and enrichment cultures distinctly revealed the viability and activity of the microorganisms, as well as their interaction with the contaminants (Fig. 4). Finally, microbial activity was also confirmed by TPH determinations of groundwater samples during the process. The results show a remarkable decrease in hydrocarbon concentrations from the very first month of treatment (Table 2). By the end of the fourth month of treatment, groundwater TPH levels were negligible and contaminant levels in the unsaturated zone were also very low; consequently, biostimulation was terminated and a monitoring program for natural attenuation was implemented to complete remediation works. GC–MS studies of selected samples of the site demonstrated that most of the degradation observed was attributable to microbial activity (Fig. 5 ; Fig. 6; see Section 4 for details). Hydrocarbon-polluted soils and groundwater are present in more than half of all sites that are subject to bioremediation [4]. Although most of the components of fuels and other petroleum derivatives are degradable, natural biodegradation yields depend on the presence or absence of adequate degraders, oxygen, and nutrient levels, and the bioavailability of the contaminants. As extensively reported, hydrocarbon-degraders are ubiquitous [18] ; [34], especially wherever there is a history of hydrocarbon spills. 