Toxic aromatic pollutants, concentrated in industrial wastes and contaminated sites, can potentially be eliminated by low cost bioremediation systems. Most commonly, the goal of these treatment systems is directed at providing optimum environmental conditions for the mineralization of the pollutants by naturally occurring microflora. Electrophilic aromatic pollutants with multiple chloro, nitro and azo groups have proven to be persistent to biodegradation by aerobic bacteria. These compounds are readily reduced by anaerobic consortia to lower chlorinated aromatics or aromatic amines but are not mineralized further. The reduction increases the susceptibility of the aromatic molecule for oxygenolytic attack. Sequencing anaerobic and aerobic biotreatment steps provide enhanced mineralization of many electrophilic aromatic pollutants. The combined activity of anaerobic and aerobic bacteria can also be obtained in a single treatment step if the bacteria are immobilized in particulate matrices (e.g. biofilm, soil aggregate, etc.). Due to the rapid uptake of oxygen by aerobes and facultative bacteria compared to the slow diffusion of oxygen, oxygen penetration into active biofilms seldom exceeds several hundred micrometers. The anaerobic microniches established inside the biofilms can be applied to the reduction of electron withdrawing functional groups in order to prepare recalcitrant aromatic compounds for further mineralization in the aerobic outer layer of the biofilm. Aside from mineralization, polyhydroxylated and chlorinated phenols as well as nitroaromatics and aromatic amines are susceptible to polymerization in aerobic environments. Consequently, an alternative approach for bioremediation systems can be directed towards incorporating these aromatic pollutants into detoxified humic-like substances. The activation of aromatic pollutants for polymerization can potentially be encouraged by an anaerobic pretreatment step prior to oxidation. Anaerobic bacteria can modify aromatic pollutants by demethylating methoxy groups and reducing nitro groups. The resulting phenols and aromatic amines are readily polymerized in a subsequent aerobic step. Aromatic compounds are the second most abundant family of organic constituents present in the biosphere after carbohydrates. The most important natural source of aromatic compounds are poorly biodegradable polymers such as lignin, condensed tannins and humus (Field & Lettinga 1992; Kirk & Farrell 1987; Stevenson 1982). Lignin, which is composed of phenylpropanoid units, accounts for 17 to 33% of the dry weight of wood (Kirk & Farrell 1987). Other aromatic compounds of lower MW such as flavonoids, aromatic amino acids and phenolic acids account for the bulk of the more readily metabolizable aromatic compounds occurring in the natural environment (Fuchs et al. 1994). Since the start of the industrial revolution, a wide variety of aromatic pollutants have also been introduced into the environment through anthropogenic activity. The main sources of the anthropogenic aromatics are summarized in Table 1. Originally it was thought that aromatic pollutants such as halogenated aromatics and nitroaromatics were foreign to the environment and consequently these have been termed as 'xenobiotic' compounds. However there is increasing evidence that halogenated aromatics are not so uncommon to life. More than 1500 naturally occurring organohalogens have now been identified (Gribble 1992). Chlorinated aromatics produced by fungi were recently shown to occur at surprisingly high concentrations (75 mg kg -1) in the environment (De Jong et al. 1994). Likewise there are some indications that nitroaromatics occur naturally. Fungi are known which produce nitroanisole as a secondary metabolite (Thaller & Turner 1972). 