Obligate anaerobic bacteria, contrary to the aerobic and facultative bacteria, can be defined as those microorganisms unable to synthesize a respiratory chain with oxygen as terminal electron acceptor and oxidize organic substrates to carbon dioxide and water. They are considered to live strictly without oxygen (Gottschalk & Peinemann 1992). The ability of strict anaerobes to survive and coexist in aerobic environments can be attributed to a limited tolerance of some anaerobes for direct contact with oxygen, such as would be the case if they were exposed to oxygen in pure culture. On the other hand, all strict anaerobes may be expected to tolerate oxygen to a certain extent if they are present in mixed culture together with facultative bacteria that consume the oxygen, forming protected microniches. Tolerance to oxygen in pure culture Aerobic and facultative bacteria are regarded as possessing appropriate protective mechanisms against the oxygen radicals. The main hypotheses for the protective mechanisms is the ability to produce two enzymes, superoxide dismutase (SOD) and catalase. SOD seems to be indispensable to all the aerobes (Gottschalk & Peinemann 1992; Morris 1979), despite the claim that a few aerobes lack it (Fee 1982). The total lack of SOD has also been suggested as the reason for oxygen intolerance among strict obligate anaerobes (Morris 1979). Fig. 8. The 50% inhibitory concentration (50% IC) of oxygen to acetoclastic methanogenic activity as a function of the rate of 02 uptake by facultative anaerobes in different samples of granular sludge obtained from upward-flow anaerobic sludge blanket (UASB) reactors (Kato et al. 1993b). The sludges were exposed to 02 during three days and the methanogenic activity was monitored with acetate directly after the exposure. The granular sludges had mean aggregate diameters of 1.3 to 2.8 ram) and were obtained from UASB treating domestic sewage (A); 'Nedalco' alcohol distillery (m); wheat starch processing (e); paper manufacturing (O); and recycle paper manufacturing ([3) wastewaters. Substrate during oxygen exposure; et, ethanol; ac, acetate; ns, no substrate supplied; cr, granular sludge was crushed. Curiously enough, many obligate anaerobes do contain SOD and they can tolerate to some extent low levels of direct contact with oxygen (Morris 1979; Rolfe et al. 1978). These findings reveal that the obligate anaerobes differ in their sensitivity to oxygen, varying from those with strict intolerance to others possessing some intrinsic tolerance. The effect of oxygen on 8 different species of anaerobic bacteria was shown to be related to the oxygen tension (0.2 to 3 atm); although each species had a different sensitivity to oxygen (Fredete et al. 1967). Low medium redox potential did not enable those microorganisms classified as intolerant anaerobes, e.g. Clostridium haemolycum, to grow at 02 tensions of 0.5%. However, moderate anaerobes, e.g. Bacteroides fragilis; could grow between 0.5% and as high as 2 to 8% 02. Microaerophiles, e.g. Vibrio sputorum and V.fetus, grew poorly in the absence of oxygen but maximally at intermediate 02 levels of 5 to 10% (Loesche 1969). The exclusion of molecular oxygen together with an environment of very low redox potential was postulated as being essential for the anaerobic microorganisms, especially the methanogens (Gottschalk & Peinemann 1992; Hungate 1969). However, some experiments showed the separate effects of oxygen and redox potential on anaerobic cultures, and oxygen concentration was by far the most important factor contributing to the toxicity (O'Brien & Morris 1971; Walden & Hentges 1975). The continuous anaerobic culture ofB. 