1994). Phenol is carboxylated first to 4- hydroxybenzoate, a reaction in which phenylphosphate is an intermediate (Lack & Fuchs 1994). Subsequently, 4-hydroxybenzoate is activated to 4-hydroxybenzoylCoA, which is reductively dehydroxylated to benzoylCoA. The aromatic ring is reduced (Koch & Fuchs 1992), and subsequently the ring is further metabolized by fl-oxidation. Figure 2 compares the pathways involved in the degradation of 3-chlorobenzoate under aerobic and methanogenic conditions. Aerobic microorganisms attack the ring with oxygenases and the removal of the chlorine atom occurs after ring fission. Typically, in the anaerobic transformation of 3-chlorobenzoate under methanogenic conditions, a consortium of bacteria is involved (Mohn & Tiedje 1992). A dechlorinating bacterium, Desulfomonile tiedjeii, was isolated from a 3-chlorobenzoate-degrading methanogenic consortia which was able to gain energy for growth by reductive dechlorination. The reducing equivalents needed for this reduction are obtained through interspecies H2 transfer originating from another bacterium in the consortium which oxidizes benzoate to acetate, CO2 and hydrogen. A remarkable feature is that the benzoate-degrading bacterium is only able to catabolize benzoate when all the reducing equivalents (hydrogen and/or formate) are consumed by the methanogens, together with the dechlorinating bacterium. Recalcitrance versus biodegradability The accumulation of aromatic pollutants in the environment indicates that these compounds are resistant to biological attack. Several factors responsible for their recalcitrance can be distinguished, having to do with either the compounds' bioavailability or the intrinsic limitations of the microorganisms involved in their biodegradation. Additionally, recalcitrance can also be attributed to modifications occurring in the environment which link the aromatic pollutants irreversibly to humus (e.g. 'bound residue'). Bioavailability limitations can result from the poor uptake of non-hydrolyzable polymers or from the slow dissolution of highly apolar pollutants. Plastics and lignin are perhaps the most typical examples of non-hydrolyzable pollutants which are persistent to biodegradation. In the case of plastics built out of aromatic hydrocarbons (e.g. polystyrenes), no enzymes are known which can break up the polymers extracellularly. However, if microorganisms are offered oligomeric pieces of the polymer which can passively diffuse into the cell, then biodegradation does occur (Cain 1992). Similarly, the natural random aromatic polymer, lignin, is virtually impossible to degrade by most microorganisms. The colour caused by lignin in forest industry wastewaters is not removed by conven- tional aerobic (Walden 1980) nor by anaerobic (Sierra et al. 1990) wastewater treatment methods. Only white rot fungi (Kirk & Farrell 1987) and several actinomycetes (Zimmermann 1990) which produce extracellular ligninolytic enzymes that can attack the large aromatic polymers oxidatively at a distance from the cell are able to cause significant biodegradation of lignin. Non-ligninolytic bacteria, however, are able to degrade oligomeric fragments of lignin that are small enough for cell uptake under both aerobic (Jokela et al. 1987) and anaerobic conditions (Chen et al. 1985; Colberg & Young 1985). Poor dissolution of apolar compounds Many aromatic pollutants such as polychlorinated aromatic hydrocarbons and polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAH) are highly apolar, having both a low solubility in water and a high tendency for strong adsorption onto organic matter in soil and sediment matrices (Means et al. 1980). The slow dissolution and desorption of these compounds into the water phase has often been found to be the rate limiting step in the biodegradation kinetics (Parsons 1992; Volkering & van Andel 1993; Weissenfels et al. 