5). The present study, along with past studies, shows that the Gammaproteobacteria, and to a lesser extent the Alphaproteobacteria, predominate the bacterial communities of marine sediment ecosystems following exposure to oil hydrocarbons (see reviews by Head et al. [27], Yakimov et al. [76], Berthe-Corti and Nachtkamp [5], and Greer [23]). Among the Gammaproteobacteria in the oiled Pensacola Beach sands, members of the Alcanivorax genus were by far the most abundant. The Alcanivorax genus has been associated with the early stages of hydrocarbon degradation (weeks to months after the spill) and has been shown to utilize saturated hydrocarbons such as straight-chain and branched alkanes (50, 76). Other hydrocarbon-degrading members of the Gammaproteobacteria that were detected in the present study (including Acinetobacter, Marinobacter, and Pseudomonas), although they also tend to be less abundant at the onset of hydrocarbon degradation, are more metabolically versatile than Alcanivorax and have been shown to degrade polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) as well as alkanes. Evidence from the present study also points to other microbial groups as key players in oil degradation. RNA-based pyrosequence libraries supported the DNA-based results as members of the Rhodobacteraceae family of the Alphaproteobacteria were among the most abundant phylotypes detected in the presence of oil. A shift toward the Rhodobacteraceae and Gram-positive groups may indicate that a succession has begun in Pensacola Beach oiled sands toward microbial groups involved in the degradation of more recalcitrant oil hydrocarbons. In field studies of weathered marine sediments which were depleted in alkanes, members of the Alphaproteobacteria and Gram positives were the prevailing groups detected (2, 36), and members of these groups represented in our culture collection (Labrenzia, Bacillus, and Microbacterium) were shown to degrade PAHs in pure culture (40, 67). OTU that showed a high sequence identity to Sulfitobacter were the most abundant members of the Rhodobacteraceae that we could assign at the genus level in our pyrosequence libraries. Sulfitobacter is a sulfite-oxidizing bacterium that has been isolated from a variety of marine environments. Thus, the capabilities of the Alphaproteobacteria genera Labrenzia and Sulfitobacter to degrade specific oil compounds should be further explored. Isolation, identification, and characterization of model hydrocarbon-degrading bacteria.Evidence from cultivation-based approaches corroborated results from our cultivation-independent molecular-based analyses. We isolated organisms from several well known oil-degrading bacterial genera (Alcanivorax, Marinobacter, Pseudomonas, Acinetobacter, Bacillus, and Microbulbifer) that were detected in abundance in oiled Pensacola Beach sands. All 24 of our isolates were screened initially in minimal media with oil as the sole carbon and electron source, thereby assessing their potential to degrade oil. The majority of strains from oiled Pensacola Beach sands showed high SSU rRNA gene sequence identity to isolates previously cultured from marine or saline habitats that were contaminated with oil hydrocarbons (14, 40, 47, 65, 71). All of these organisms were demonstrated to degrade oil hydrocarbons in pure culture in the present study or by others (14, 40, 47, 65, 71, 76) or were detected in oil-contaminated marine environments (27) (Fig. 3 and Table 5). Bacteria from the genus Alcanivorax and other members of the Gammaproteobacteria isolated in the present study have been demonstrated to degrade alkanes in pure culture (76). Representatives from at least six of the species we isolated (Acinetobacter sp., Bacillus sp., Labrenzia sp., Microbacterium sp., M. hydrocarbonoclasticus, P. pachastrellae, and P. stutzeri) have been linked to PAH degradation in pure culture (27, 40, 67). Although the Vibrio species represented in the present study have not yet been shown to degrade oil in pure culture, some vibrios have been found to metabolize hydrocarbons, including PAHs (24). Our results are in general agreement with previous cultivation studies of these hydrocarbonoclastic taxa. Among the OTU that could be classified to the genus level, Alcanivorax and Marinobacter groups showed the highest relative abundance among known hydrocarbon degraders in our pyrosequence libraries (Table 5) and were well represented among our isolates (Table 4). Marinobacter is a metabolically versatile hydrocarbon-degrading taxon, capable of utilizing a broad range of carbon substrates inluding aliphatics and PAHs (18, 25). In contrast, the 15 described species of the Alcanivorax group are thought to be highly specialized (50), with A. dieselolei listed as an “obligate hydrocarbonoclastic bacterium” (OHCB) that is capable of utilizing a very narrow range of carbon substrates (76). Our isolate with 100% sequence identity (across 850 bases) with A. dieselolei (AB453732) did show the narrowest range of carbon substrate utilization among the strains we tested (see Results and the supplemental material). The results of the present study and others indicate that the OHCB designation may need to be reconsidered, however, and genome sequencing will be essential to verifying the absence of metabolic pathways. 