A significant portion of oil from the recent Deepwater Horizon (DH) oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico was transported to the shoreline, where it may have severe ecological and economic consequences. The objectives of this study were (i) to identify and characterize predominant oil-degrading taxa that may be used as model hydrocarbon degraders or as microbial indicators of contamination and (ii) to characterize the in situ response of indigenous bacterial communities to oil contamination in beach ecosystems. This study was conducted at municipal Pensacola Beach, FL, where chemical analysis revealed weathered oil petroleum hydrocarbon (C8 to C40) concentrations ranging from 3.1 to 4,500 mg kg−1 in beach sands. A total of 24 bacterial strains from 14 genera were isolated from oiled beach sands and confirmed as oil-degrading microorganisms. Isolated bacterial strains were primarily Gammaproteobacteria, including representatives of genera with known oil degraders (Alcanivorax, Marinobacter, Pseudomonas, and Acinetobacter). Sequence libraries generated from oiled sands revealed phylotypes that showed high sequence identity (up to 99%) to rRNA gene sequences from the oil-degrading bacterial isolates. The abundance of bacterial SSU rRNA gene sequences was ∼10-fold higher in oiled (0.44 × 107 to 10.2 × 107 copies g−1) versus clean (0.024 × 107 to 1.4 × 107 copies g−1) sand. Community analysis revealed a distinct response to oil contamination, and SSU rRNA gene abundance derived from the genus Alcanivorax showed the largest increase in relative abundance in contaminated samples. We conclude that oil contamination from the DH spill had a profound impact on the abundance and community composition of indigenous bacteria in Gulf beach sands, and our evidence points to members of the Gammaproteobacteria (Alcanivorax, Marinobacter) and Alphaproteobacteria (Rhodobacteraceae) as key players in oil degradation there. The blowout of the Deepwater Horizon (DH) drilling rig resulted in the world's largest accidental release of oil into the ocean in recorded history. The equivalent volume of approximately 4.9 million barrels of light crude oil were discharged into the Gulf of Mexico from April to July 2010 (OSAT/NOAA report [56] and oil budget calculator [43]), and the total hydrocarbon discharge was 40% higher if gaseous hydrocarbons are included (34). A large amount of the discharged oil was transported to the surface and reached the shoreline. Although cleanup efforts have remained aggressive, a substantial portion of the oil remains trapped in coastal ecosystems, especially in benthic areas. Permeable sandy sediments cover large areas of the seafloor in the Gulf of Mexico, including beach ecosystems. Marine sands act as efficient biocatalytic filters that play an important role in the biogeochemical cycles of carbon and nutrients in shallow Gulf waters (11, 19, 20). Marine sands in the Gulf are covered with biofilms of highly diverse microbial communities (30, 53), and the bacterial abundance in sands exceeds that of the overlying seawater by orders of magnitude (7, 35, 38). Enhanced porewater exchange in highly permeable marine sands stimulates microbial metabolism through the delivery of growth substrates and the removal of waste products (7, 15, 28, 29). Similar to the microbially mediated breakdown of natural organic matter, biodegradation mediated by indigenous microbial communities is the ultimate fate of the majority of oil hydrocarbon that enters the marine environment (4, 42, 59). Hydrocarbon-degrading microorganisms are ubiquitous in the marine environment (27, 76), and biodegradation was shown to be successful in naturally remediating oil contamination associated with several spills that impacted shorelines predominated by permeable marine sediments (8, 46, 66). Although bioremediation field trials were often carried out, there is a paucity of information on the indigenous microbial communities that catalyze oil degradation under in situ conditions at spill sites (2). Even less information is available on which members of the microbial community are active in degrading hydrocarbons, and the impacts of various environmental parameters in controlling the activities of indigenous hydrocarbon-degrading microorganisms have not been specifically addressed. Thus, the theoretical basis to understand and predict the dynamics of hydrocarbon-degrading microorganisms in situ is lacking (27). Contamination of beach ecosystems by oil has the potential to cause severe environmental and economic consequences in the Gulf region. The risk of accidental oil discharge to the marine environment will remain high for the foreseeable future since increased economic pressure to access new oil reserves in deep marine waters will require less tested technologies (32). Although technologies for oil drilling have advanced rapidly in recent decades, strategies to respond to oil spills and to assess environmental impacts of oil contamination have lagged behind (33). An understanding of the impacts of oil on indigenous microbial communities and identification of oil-degrading microbial groups are prerequisite for directing the management and cleanup of oil-contaminated beach ecosystems. Thus, the objectives of the present study were (i) to identify and interrogate the ecophysiology of predominant oil-degrading taxa that may serve as model organisms and microbial indicators of contamination and (ii) to characterize the in situ response of indigenous bacterial communities to oil contamination in Gulf beach sands. Site and sample description.This study focused on beach sands collected from Pensacola Beach, FL, in the area of the municipal beach (30°19.57N, 087°10.47W), which was exposed to heavy oil contamination from the Deepwater Horizon (DH) oil spill beginning in the first week of June 2010. Sands in the supratidal zone of the beach where thick buried oil layers were found were dry with no extractable pore water and no dissolved nutrients. 