Temperature influences petroleum biodegradation by its effect on the physical nature and chemical composition of the oil, rate of hydrocarbon metabolism by microorganisms, and composition of the microbial community (7). At low temperatures, the viscosity of the oil increases, the volatilization of toxic short-chain alkanes is reduced, and their water solubility is increased, delaying the onset of biodegradation (10). Rates of degradation are generally observed to decrease with decreasing temperature; this is believed to be a result primarily of decreased rates of enzymatic activity, or the "Qlo" effect (10, 60). Higher temperatures increase the rates of hydrocarbon metabolism to a maximum, typically in the range of 30 to 40°C, above which the membrane toxicity of hydrocarbons is increased (29). Thermophilic alkaneutilizing bacteria do exist, however (85, 89). Climate and season would be expected to select for different populations of hydrocarbon-utilizing microorganisms which are adapted to ambient temperatures. Colwell et al. (43) reported extensive degradation of Metula crude oil by mixed cultures of marine bacteria at 3°C, and Huddleston and Cresswell (73) observed petroleum biodegradation in soil at -1.1°C. By contrast, only negligible degradation of oil was exhibited in Arctic marine ice (14) and in frozen tundra soil (15). Low winter temperatures were the limiting factor for the biodegradation of polyaromatic hydrocarbons in estuarine sediment (124) and of a variety of hydrocarbons in freshwater lakes (46). The initial steps in the catabolism of aliphatic (125), cyclic (104), and aromatic (37) hydrocarbons by bacteria and fungi involve the oxidation of the substrate by oxygenases, for which molecular oxygen is required. Aerobic conditions are therefore necessary for this route of microbial oxidation of hydrocarbons in the environment. Conditions of oxygen limitation normally do not exist in the upper levels of the water column in marine (54) and freshwater (45) environments. Aquatic sediments, however, are generally anoxic except for a thin layer at the surface of the sediment (45, 66). The availability of oxygen in soils is dependent on rates of microbial oxygen consumption, the type of soil, whether the soil is waterlogged, and the presence of utilizable substrates which can lead to oxygen depletion (29). The concentration of oxygen has been identified as the rate-limiting variable in the biodegradation of petroleum in soil (139) and of gasoline in groundwater (74). Anaerobic degradation of petroleum hydrocarbons by microorganisms has been shown in some studies to occur only at negligible rates (18, 74, 150), and its ecological significance has been generally considered to be minor (7, 29, 45, 54). However, the microbial degradation of oxidized aromatic compounds such as benzoate (134) and of halogenated aromatic compounds such as the halobenzoates (131), chlorophenols (30), and polychlorinated biphenyls (40) has been shown to occur under anaerobic conditions. Recent evidence also indicates that microbial consortia from soil and sludge are capable of metabolizing unsubstituted and alkyl-substituted aromatics, including benzene, toluene, xylene, 1,3-dimethylbenzene, acenaphthene, and naphthalene, in the absence of molecular oxygen (62, 90, 91, 157). Hydroxylation of the aromatic ring of toluene and benzene is believed to depend on water as a source of oxygen (62). Nitrate can act as the final electron acceptor under denitrifying conditions (91, 157). The anaerobic transformation of benzene and toluene under methanogenic conditions has been tentatively characterized as a fermentation, in which the substrate is partially oxidized and partially reduced, yielding carbon dioxide and methane as end products (62). The amount of substrate removed by anaerobic biodegradation can be significant; at least 50% of benzene and toluene were mineralized in 60 days under methanogenic conditions (62), and naphthalene and acenaphthene were degraded to nondetectable levels in 45 and 40 days, respectively, under denitrifying conditions (91). The importance of anaerobic biodegradation of aromatic hydrocarbons in the environment is unknown, and further studies are required to elucidate anaerobic pathways, as well as determine whether other hydrocarbons, such as alkanes, and hydrocarbon mixtures, such as crude oil, can be fully degraded under denitrifying or methanogenic conditions. The release of hydrocarbons into aquatic environments which contain low concentrations of inorganic nutrients often produces excessively high carbon/nitrogen or carbon/ phosphorus ratios, or both, which are unfavorable for microbial growth (7, 45). It is well established that the availability of nitrogen and phosphorus limits the microbial degradation of hydrocarbons in estuarine water and sediment (140), seawater (11), marine sediment (27), freshwater lakes (149), Arctic ponds (24), freshwater sediments (46), and groundwater (74). Adjustment of carbon/nitrogen/phosphorus ratios by the addition of nitrogen and phosphorus in the form of oleophilic fertilizers, including paraffinized urea, octylphosphate, ferric octoate, paraffin-supported MgNH4 P04, and 2-ethylhexyldipolyethylene oxide phosphate, stimulates the biodegradation of crude oil and individual hydrocarbons in seawater and in Arctic ponds and lakes (12, 13, 24, 50, 71, 72, 100). Inorganic salts of nitrogen and phosphorus are effective in enclosed systems (12, 13, 50, 72) but tend to wash out in simulated field experiments (12, 13). Nitrogen and phosphorus may also be limiting in soils, and the acceleration of the biodegradation of crude oil or gasoline in soil and groundwater by the addition of urea-phosphate, N-P-K fertilizers, and ammonium and phosphate salts has been demonstrated in several studies (51, 74, 77, 138). 