The recent spill of more than 200,000 barrels of crude oil from the oil tanker Exxon Valdez in Prince William Sound, Alaska (65), as well as smaller spills in Texas, Rhode Island, and the Delaware Bay (5), has refocused attention on the problem of hydrocarbon contamination in the environment. It is estimated that the annual global input of petroleum is between 1.7 and 8.8 million metric tons, the majority of which is derived from anthropogenic sources (95). Biodegradation of hydrocarbons by natural populations of microorganisms represents one of the primary mechanisms by which petroleum and other hydrocarbon pollutants are eliminated from the environment (95). The effects of environmental parameters on the microbial degradation of hydrocarbons, the elucidation of metabolic pathways and genetic bases for hydrocarbon dissimilation by microorganisms, and the effects of hydrocarbon contamination on microorganisms and microbial communities have been areas of intense interest and the subjects of several reviews (7, 9, 44, 95). The intent of the present review is to present a broad and updated overview of the microbial ecology of hydrocarbon degradation, emphasizing both environmental and biological factors which are involved in determining the rate at which and extent to which hydrocarbons are removed from the environment by biodegradation. Aspects of biodegradation of petroleum and individual hydrocarbons in marine, freshwater, and soil ecosystems are presented. It should be noted that the majority of studies have been concerned with degradation of oil in the marine environment, and this is necessarily reflected, to a certain extent, in this review. Applications of relatively recent advances in molecular biological techniques, such as the isolation of plasmid DNA and the construction of DNA probes, to the study of hydrocarbon degradation by microbial communities will be discussed, as well as the use of natural or genetically engineered microorganisms as seeds to increase rates of biodegradation of hydrocarbon pollutants in the environment. Chemical Composition of the Oil or Hydrocarbons Petroleum hydrocarbons can be divided into four classes: the saturates, the aromatics, the asphaltenes (phenols, fatty acids, ketones, esters, and porphyrins), and the resins (pyridines, quinolines, carbazoles, sulfoxides, and amides) (44). Hydrocarbons differ in their susceptibility to microbial attack and, in the past, have generally been ranked in the following order of decreasing susceptibility: n-alkanes > branched alkanes > low-molecular-weight aromatics > cyclic alkanes (104). Biodegradation rates have been shown to be highest for the saturates, followed by the light aromatics, with high-molecular-weight aromatics and polar compounds exhibiting extremely low rates of degradation (59, 76, 145). This pattern is not universal, however, as Cooney et al. (46) reported greater degradation losses of naphthalene than of hexadecane in water-sediment mixtures from a freshwater lake and Jones et al. (78) observed extensive biodegradation of alkylaromatics in marine sediments prior to detectable changes in the n-alkane profile of the crude oil tested. Fedorak and Westlake (53) also reported a more rapid attack of aromatic hydrocarbons during the degradation of crude oil by marine microbial populations from a pristine site and a commercial harbor. Horowitz and Atlas (71), using an in situ continuous-flow system in a study of biodegradation in Arctic coastal waters, and Bertrand et al. (26), using a continuous-culture fermentor and a mixed culture of marine bacteria, observed degradation of all fractions of crude oil at similar rates, in marked contrast to the results of most other studies. In the latter investigation, experimental conditions were optimized and extensive losses of resins (52%) and asphaltenes (74%) were observed. The microbial degradation of these fractions, which have previously been considered relatively recalcitrant to biodegradation (143), can be ascribed to cooxidation, in which non-growth hydrocarbons are oxidized in the presence of hydrocarbons which can serve as growth substrates (103). Evidence for cooxidation of asphaltenes was provided by Rontani et al. (114), who reported degradation of asphaltenic compounds in mixed bacterial cultures to be dependent upon the presence of n-alkanes 12 to 18 carbon atoms in length. Compositional heterogeneity among different crude oils and refined products influences the overall rate of biodegradation both of the oil and of its component fractions. Walker et al. (147) compared the degradation of two crude and two fuel oils by a mixed culture of estuarine bacteria. Lowsulfur, high-saturate South Louisiana crude oil was the most susceptible to microbial degradation, and high-sulfur, higharomatic Bunker C fuel oil was the least susceptible. Percent losses of saturated, aromatic, resinous, and asphaltenic hydrocarbons were highly variable among the four oils. Similarly, Jobson et al. (76) observed a greater degree of degradation of "high-quality" North Cantal crude oil than of Lost Horse Hill crude oil, which contained higher levels of sulfur, aromatics, asphaltenes, and resins, when a mixed culture enriched with the North Cantal oil was used. More extensive biodegradation of the Lost Horse Hill oil occurred when a mixed culture enriched with the same oil was used. 