Based on the number of published reports, the most important hydrocarbon-degrading bacteria in both marine and soil environments are Achromobacter, Acinetobacter, Alcaligenes, Arthrobacter, Bacillus, Flavobacterium, Nocardia, and Pseudomonas spp. and the coryneforms; the importance of hydrocarbon-degrading strains of the saltrequiring Vibrio spp. is limited to the marine'environment. Austin et al. (17), in a numerical taxonomy study of petroleum-degrading bacteria from Chesapeake Bay water and sediment, found that Pseudomonas, Micrococcus, and Nocardia spp., members of the family Enterobacteriaceae, acti'nomycetes, and coryneforms made up 95% of the isolates. Among the fungi, Aureobasidium, Candida, Rhodotorula, and Sporobolomyces spp. are the most common marine isolates and Trichoderma and Mortierella spp. are the most common soil isolates. Hydrocarbon-degrading Aspergillus and Penicillium spp. have been frequently isolated from both environments. Based on the work of Kirk and Gordon (84), the truly marine, beach-adapted genera Corollospora, Dendryphiella, Lulworthia, and Varicosporina should be added to the list. The extent to which bacteria, yeasts, and filamentous fungi participate in the biodegradation of hydrocarbons has been the subject of only limited study, but appears to be a function of the ecosystem and local environmental conditions. In the marine environment, bacteria are generally considered to represent the predominant hydrocarbon-degrading element of the microbial community. Floodgate (54) suggested that fungi were relatively minor components of the marine microflora, increasing in numbers in nearshore regions (3, 4), the intertidal zone (84, 107), and salt marshes and mangrove areas (3). Fungi have also been reported to be important inhabitants of specialized niches such as subMICROBIOL. Few studies, though, have directly compared the degrees of hydrocarbon degradation accomplished by bacteria and fungi in the marine environment. Walker and Colwell (140) reported that Chesapeake Bay bacteria accounted for all of the utilization of a model petroleum at 0 and 5°C; at 10°C, yeasts but not filamentous fungi contributed to the utilization of the petroleum. A hydrocarbon-degrading fungus, Cladosporium resinae, was responsible for 20 to 40% of the degradation of petroleum when added to the inoculum. Ahearn and Meyers (3) found that populations of yeasts increased in oil-contaminated estuarine sediments over a 4-month period, but declined in open-ocean waters despite the presence of oil. Ahearn and Crow (1) observed relatively small numbers of yeasts associated with crude oil after the Amoco Cadiz spill in the North Sea. Even less is known of the comparative roles of bacteria and fungi in degrading hydrocarbons in freshwater ecosystems. Yeasts are at least an order of magnitude more abundant in rivers and lakes than in the open ocean, and the frequency of molds is generally higher in freshwater than seawater samples (3). Cooney and Summers (47) reported 100-fold-greater numbers of hydrocarbon-utilizing bacteria than yeasts and filamentous fungi in sediments from freshwater lakes, but the relative amounts of biomass of the two groups were considered to be nearly equal. Both bacteria and fungi are relatively plentiful in soil, and members of both groups contribute to the biodegradation of hydrocarbons (29). Hydrocarbon-utilizing bacteria (16, 75, 106) and fungi (16, 88, 106) are readily isolated from soil, and the application of oil or oily wastes to soil results in increased numbers of bacteria and fungi (75, 88, 106). In the only published comparative study of hydrocarbon degradation by bacteria and fungi in soil, Song et al. (127) observed that 82% of n-hexadecane mineralization in a sandy loam was attributed to bacteria and only 13% was attributed to fungi. Algae and protozoa are important members of the microbial community in both aquatic and terrestrial ecosystems, but the extent of their involvement in hydrocarbon biodegradation is largely unknown. Walker et al. 