6A Metagenome, metatranscriptome and single-cell sequencing reveal microbial response to Deepwater Horizon oil spill Abstract The Deepwater Horizon oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico resulted in a deep-sea hydrocarbon plume that caused a shift in the indigenous microbial community composition with unknown ecological consequences. Early in the spill history, a bloom of uncultured, thus uncharacterized, members of the Oceanospirillales was previously detected, but their role in oil disposition was unknown. Here our aim was to determine the functional role of the Oceanospirillales and other active members of the indigenous microbial community using deep sequencing of community DNA and RNA, as well as single-cell genomics. Shotgun metagenomic and metatranscriptomic sequencing revealed that genes for motility, chemotaxis and aliphatic hydrocarbon degradation were significantly enriched and expressed in the hydrocarbon plume samples compared with uncontaminated seawater collected from plume depth. In contrast, although genes coding for degradation of more recalcitrant compounds, such as benzene, toluene, ethylbenzene, total xylenes and polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons, were identified in the metagenomes, they were expressed at low levels, or not at all based on analysis of the metatranscriptomes. Isolation and sequencing of two Oceanospirillales single cells revealed that both cells possessed genes coding for n-alkane and cycloalkane degradation. Specifically, the near-complete pathway for cyclohexane oxidation in the Oceanospirillales single cells was elucidated and supported by both metagenome and metatranscriptome data. The draft genome also included genes for chemotaxis, motility and nutrient acquisition strategies that were also identified in the metagenomes and metatranscriptomes. These data point towards a rapid response of members of the Oceanospirillales to aliphatic hydrocarbons in the deep sea. Keywords: Gulf oil spill; Deepwater Horizon; Oceanospirillales; single-cell genomics; metagenomics; metatranscriptomics Top of page Introduction On 20 April 2010, the Deepwater Horizon oil rig exploded and sank, resulting in an unremitting flow of oil from April 2010 to July 2010 into the Gulf of Mexico, for a total of approximately 4.9 million barrels (779 million liters, ±10%) (Federal Interagency Solutions Group, 2010). The MC252 oil fraction was comprised of a complex mixture of hydrocarbons including saturated hydrocarbons (74%), aromatic hydrocarbons (including polycyclic hydrocarbons (PAHs)) which reached maximal concentrations of 1200 mg l−1 at the surface (Hazen et al., 2010) (16%), and polar compounds (10%) (Reddy et al., 2012). During the spill, an oil plume was detected at depths of approximately 1000–1300 m (Camilli et al., 2010; Hazen et al., 2010). The deep-sea oil plume was reported to contain gaseous components (Valentine et al., 2010; Kessler et al., 2011), as well as non-gaseous, more recalcitrant compounds such as benzene, toluene, ethylbenzene and total xylenes (BTEX) at concentrations ranging 50–150 μg l−1 (Camilli et al., 2010; Hazen et al., 2010). This influx of hydrocarbons had a significant impact on the indigenous microbial community structure (Hazen et al., 2010; Valentine et al., 2010; Kessler et al., 2011; Redmond and Valentine, 2011), including enrichment of uncultivated members of the Oceanospirillales early in the spill history (Hazen et al., 2010; Redmond and Valentine, 2011). The lack of a cultivated isolate of the Oceanospirillales from the plume precluded a clear understanding of the direct physiological and ecological consequences of the hydrocarbons on this group of microorganisms. The documented shifts in the microbial community structure over time in response to the deep-sea plume of hydrocarbons have been shown by DNA-based methods such as cloning and sequencing of 16S rRNA genes (Hazen et al., 2010; Valentine et al., 2010; Kessler et al., 2011; Redmond and Valentine, 2011) and microarray analysis of functional genes (Lu et al., 2011). Cloning and sequencing revealed a clear temporal succession of bacteria in the deep-sea hydrocarbon plume from a community dominated by Oceanospirillales (Hazen et al., 2010; Redmond and Valentine, 2011) to Colwellia and Cycloclasticus (Valentine et al., 2010; Redmond and Valentine, 2011) and finally to methylotrophic bacteria (Kessler et al., 2011). To date, however, no deep-sequencing approach has been used to analyze the microbial community structure, including rare members of the community, and their function. In addition, there is no information about what microorganisms were active or which functional genes were actually expressed in response to the oil spill. Here we aimed to determine the specific roles of the Oceanospirillales that were enriched in the plume early in the spill history. In addition, we aimed to determine which functional genes and pathways were expressed in the deep-sea plume. To address these aims, we not only analyzed the functional gene repertoire in total DNA extracted from metagenomic samples but also extracted and sequenced total RNA metatranscriptomes to determine which genes were highly expressed and representative of active members of the community. In addition, to specifically characterize the functional roles of the dominant Oceanospirillales, we isolated and sequenced single-representative cells. For all of these analyses, we used the Illumina sequencing platform (Illumina, San Diego, CA, USA), which resulted in over 60 Gb of data. To analyze and integrate these large 'omics' data sets, including raw, unassembled reads, we used several novel bioinformatics approaches, which are outlined in Figure 1. For this study, we focused on samples that were collected during the oil spill between 27 and 31 May 2010 (Hazen et al., 2010) for in-depth phylogenetic and functional analyses: two plume samples, one proximal (1.5 km from the wellhead) and one distal (11 km from the wellhead), and one uncontaminated sample collected at plume depth (40 km from the wellhead) (Supplementary Figure S1). Figure 1. Figure 1 - Unfortunately we are unable to provide accessible alternative text for this. If you require assistance to access this image, please contact help@nature.com or the author Methods schematic. 