If you require assistance to access this image, please contact help@nature.com or the author Analysis of genes involved in hydrocarbon degradation in the metagenome data. Blue bars denote the distal station metagenome, black bars denote the uncontaminated sample metagenome and red bars denote the proximal station metagenome. Raw, unassembled metagenomic reads were compared with proteins involved in hydrocarbon degradation, using a custom database using the tblastn algorithm. A bit score cutoff of greater than or equal to40 was used. Genes were grouped according to function. AIndicates that a corrected P-value was not significant. Gene categories denoted with an ‘‡’ indicate a similar substrate degradation pathway in which the different substrates are degraded by the same enzyme (simple ring oxygenases). A complete list of all gene categories is provided in Supplementary Table S6. Full figure and legend (98K) To determine the active microbial community composition and expressed functions in the plume interval, we extracted high quality total RNA from the proximal and distal plume stations and sequenced the samples using the Illumina platform, resulting in a total of 140 million paired-end reads (15 Gb). To assign microbial identities, the unassembled metatranscriptome data (70 million single reads) was compared with a Greengenes (DeSantis et al., 2006) database using blastn. We found that Oceanospirillales was not only the most abundant member of the community but also was active with a relative abundance of transcripts of 46% in the proximal plume station sample and 69% in the distal plume station sample (Figure 2 and Supplementary Table S4). Other members of the community that were active included Alteromonadales (11% relative abundance proximal plume/9% relative abundance distal plume), Deltaproteobacteria (10%/1%), Pseudomonadales (6%/4%) and SAR86 (3%/1%) (Figure 2 and Supplementary Table S4). These community members were also relatively abundant in our metagenome data (Figure 2 and Supplementary Table S3). Therefore, the dominant members of the community that were enriched by the deep-sea plume were also active in the plume. Previous analysis of samples from the deep-sea plume using DNA–based analyses reported other microbial clades that were more or less abundant at different sampling times. For example, members of the Colwelliaceae were detected as dominant community members in the deep-sea plume in samples collected in mid-June 2010 (Valentine et al., 2010). In addition, microcosm experiments with labeled ethane and propane were dominated by Colwellia, with some Oceanospirillales increasing in abundance (Redmond and Valentine, 2011). Thus, these authors suggested that Colwellia was primarily responsible for in situ ethane and propane oxidation, with perhaps, Oceanospirillales also having a role (Redmond and Valentine, 2011). However, cross-feeding could not be excluded (Redmond and Valentine, 2011). Although the Colwelliaceae were not abundant at <1% relative abundance in our samples collected in late May, we found that they were represented in the active microbial community in both of our plume samples (Figure 2 and Supplementary Table S4). However, other members of the community that were previously reported to be abundant (Valentine et al., 2010), such as Cycloclasticus, which has members that are able to degrade simple and PAH aromatics (Dyksterhouse et al., 1995), although present in the pyrotag data at low abundances (Supplementary Table S2), were not represented in our metagenome or metatranscriptome data (Supplementary Tables S3 and S4). In addition, the methylotrophs (Methylococcales and Methylophaga), although rare, at <1% relative abundance in the plume samples, were active (Supplementary Table S4). Further, the type II methanotrophs Methylosinus, Methylocystis and Methylocella were observed in both plume samples, although at very low levels (<0.01% relative abundance). The metatranscriptome data thus revealed for the first time that Oceanospirillales was the dominant active member of the microbial community in the deep-sea plume samples, which we collected in late May, in addition to some other members of the community, including some rare members. We next determined what functions were expressed in the active microbial community enriched in the plume, with a focus on hydrocarbon degradation genes. A total of 70 million single, unassembled reads resulting from the metatranscriptome sequencing were compared with a hydrocarbon-degradation gene database. Differences in relative abundances of active degradation genes (RNA transcripts) in the plume samples were more pronounced compared with the DNA analyses. The metatranscriptome data largely supported our metagenome data; for example, finding that alkane monooxygenases were highly expressed, with the same pathways for alkane, and specifically for cyclohexane degradation present and abundant (Figure 4). This finding suggests that alkane degradation was the dominant hydrocarbon degradation pathway expressed in the plume at the time interval we sampled. 