Insufficient RNA was obtained from the uncontaminated sample for downstream processing. Total RNA from the proximal and distal plume stations was amplified using the Message Amp II-Bacteria Kit (Ambion) following the manufacturer’s instructions. First-strand synthesis of cDNA from the resulting antisense RNA was carried out with the SuperScript III First-Strand Synthesis System (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA). The SuperScript Double-Stranded cDNA Synthesis Kit (Invitrogen) was used to synthesize double-stranded cDNA. cDNA was purified using a QIAquick PCR purification kit (Qiagen, Valencia, CA, USA). Poly(A) tails were removed by digesting purified DNA with BpmI for 3 h at 37 °C. Digested cDNA was purified with QIAquick PCR purification kit (Qiagen). Emulsion PCR To increase yields required for sequencing, DNA and cDNA were amplified by emulsion PCR. A detailed description of this method can be found in Blow et al. (2008). Briefly, DNA for metagenomic samples was sheared (cDNA was not sheared) using the Covaris S-Series instrument (Covaris, Woburn, MA, USA). DNA and cDNA were end-repaired using the End-It DNA End-Repair Kit (Epicentre Biotechnologies, Madison, WI, USA). End-repaired DNA and cDNA were then ligated with Illumina Paired End Adapters 1 and 2. For each sample, 10 ng was used for emulsion PCR. Emulsion PCR reagents and thermal cycler protocols were as previously described (Blow et al., 2008). Amplified products were cleaned with a PCR mini-elute column (Qiagen), visualized and ~300 bp fragments were excised from a 2% agarose gel. Sequencing Metagenomic shotgun sequencing libraries of the samples were sequenced using the Illumina GAIIx 2 × 114 bp pair-end technology. The Illumina sequencing platform was used to generate 14–17 Gb of sequence data per sample. cDNA was sequenced using the Illumina GAIIx sequencing platform. cDNA was quantified and clustered accordingly onto one lane of a flow cell on Illumina’s cBot Cluster Generation System. After cluster generation, the flow cell was transferred to a GAIIx and was sequenced for 100 cycles for read 1. Then, turnaround chemistry was performed by the paired-end module, which prepared the flow cell for read 2 sequencing. Another 100 cycles of sequencing followed, resulting in 100 bp paired-end reads. Sequence assembly and analysis Raw Illumina metagenomic reads (~113 bp in length) were trimmed using a minimum quality cutoff of 3. Both trimmed and untrimmed reads were kept for further assembly. Paired-end Illumina reads were assembled using SOAPdenovo (http://soap.genomics.org.cn/soapdenovo.html) at a range of Kmers (21, 23, 25, 27, 29 and 31) for both trimmed and untrimmed reads. Default settings for all SOAPdenovo assemblies were used (flags: –d 1 and –R). Contigs generated by each assembly (12 total contig sets) were merged using a combination of in-house Perl script. Contigs were then sorted into two pools based on length. 