GoM315, GoM278, and GoM023 exhibited similar levels of Oceanospirillales spp. (1.5, 1.7, and 1.4% of bacterial sequences, respectively) and Gammaproteobacteria in general (19, 20, and 19% of bacterial sequences, respectively), showing no correlation to the hydrocarbon levels associated with each sample. Alphaproteobacteria associated with aerobic oil-degradation were also found at very low abundances with similar levels across the deep-sea sediment samples, including Roseovarius spp. and Maricaulis spp. (<0.5 and <0.3% of bacterial species, respectively). Nonetheless, mono- and dioxygenases were present in all three samples. These data indicate that the potential for aerobic degradation is present in these samples, albeit at much lower levels than observed in the water column (Hazen et al., 2010; Mason et al., 2012), and that the level of hydrocarbon exposure did not significantly impact this potential. One potential explanation for this is that the hydrocarbons susceptible to aerobic degradation were depleted rapidly in the water column, either by dispersants or by the quick responding bacterial blooms of aerobic hydrocarbon-degrading microorganisms (Hazen et al., 2010; Kessler et al., 2011). As a result, the hydrocarbon loading that occurred in the deep-sea sediments may not have promoted the growth of microorganisms capable of aerobic hydrocarbon degradation, but rather that of microorganisms capable of degrading the remaining recalcitrant hydrocarbons that require anaerobic processing. It is also possible, however, that we sampled at a time when the community was just beginning to shift to reflect the increasing importance of anaerobic microbes. Future work involving time series samples and/or the analysis of aerobic metabolites will be necessary to provide further insights. Anaerobic biodegradation of hydrocarbons is an important biogeochemical process in a variety of deep-subsurface environments (Aitken et al., 2004; Jones et al., 2007; Wawrik et al., 2012). Studies during the last two decades have highlighted the ability of anaerobic microorganisms to metabolize a variety of hydrocarbons, including n-alkanes, n-alkenes, alicyclic hydrocarbons, and mono- and polycyclic aromatic compounds (for reviews see Boll and Heider, 2010; Widdel and Grundmann, 2010; Widdel et al., 2010). To date, the most well-characterized anaerobic mechanism for hydrocarbon activation and degradation is via addition of the hydrocarbon to the double bond of fumarate (“fumarate addition”) catalyzed by glycyl radical enzymes (for reviews see Boll and Heider, 2010; Widdel and Grundmann, 2010). Deltaproteobacteria, in particular, have been implicated in “fumarate addition” of both aromatic and aliphatic hydrocarbons (Widdel et al., 2010). In this study, metagenomic analysis revealed an increase in the percentage of bacterial sequences that represent Deltaproteobacteria associated with the sediment cores closest to the DWH well, where there were higher levels of PAHs (Operational Science Advisory Team, 2010) and detectable levels of alkanes and alkenes. It should be noted that the increase in Deltaproteobacteria is potentially an indirect effect of the increased dead biomass from the oil spill, which cannot be ruled out by this study. In any case, recruitment plots demonstrated that 857 and 547 of the metagenomic sequences mapped onto the Deltaproteobacterial genomes of Desulfatibacillum alkenivorans AK-01 and G. metallireducens GS-15, respectively. The increases in Deltaproteobacteria were also concurrent with an increase in functional genes involved in the anaerobic degradation of hydrocarbons, such as BSS, acetyl-CoA acetyltransferase and benzoyl-CoA reductase. These results suggest that the microbial response to anthropogenic hydrocarbon loading may mirror aspects of microbial communities associated with Gulf of Mexico natural seeps, where Deltaproteobacteria play a dominant role in their biogeochemical activity, including anaerobic hydrocarbon degradation (Lloyd et al., 2010; Orcutt et al., 2010). Most likely, however, the specific genus-level lineages of Deltaproteobacteria will be dependent on the hydrocarbon source present, since the natural gas-rich seeps contain specialized deltaproteobacterial groups for anaerobic methane utilization that are unlikely to thrive in sediments with more recalcitrant oil remnants. Clone libraries of assA and bssA supported the metagenomic analysis. Both genotypes were detected in sediments near the DWH well (GoM278 and GoM315), but not at the unimpacted site (GoM023). The presence of assA and bssA suggests the potential for both aliphatic and aromatic hydrocarbon activation via “fumarate addition.” Although assA genotypes were detected in sediments from GoM278 and GoM315, alkylsuccinates were not detected in these samples. However, this should not be interpreted as conclusive evidence that aliphatic substrates were not being metabolized. The requisite metabolites are usually in low abundance (typically nM) and transitory and could have easily been further metabolized or been below method detection limits. The alkanoic acid compounds detected in the GoM samples could have been formed via multiple biological pathways, including aerobic and anaerobic transformation of aliphatic hydrocarbons, but they are not highly diagnostic. Despite the non-detection of alkylsuccinates, both bssA genotypes and the putative benzylsuccinate metabolites were detected in the two sediment cores closest to the spill site, suggesting in situ anaerobic biodegradation of alkylbenzenes. This is consistent with the increased number of genes related to “aromatic metabolism” detected in the corresponding sediments via metagenomic analysis. 