Especially, several genes for PAH degradation were enriched in the oil plume samples, which could be important in determining the long-term effects of the oil spill on the marine ecosystems. Also, consistent with phylogenetic gene distribution obtained using a phylogenetic microarray ‘PhyloChip’ (Hazen et al, 2010), functional genes representative of the order Oceanospirillales appeared to have significantly higher (P<0.01) abundance in the plume samples than in non-plume samples, although the dominance of the Oceanospirillum population consuming the oil in the plume was based on clone library and sequence analysis of 16S rRNA genes (Hazen et al, 2010). GeoChip was not originally designed to link the detection of functional genes to the existence of related microbial population and it contains 567 functional genes derived from the order Oceanospirillales, with 25 genes detected in this study. In addition, a large number of metal resistance genes were enriched in plume samples, which are usually linked to organic degradation genes, for example, on plasmids (Parales and Haddock, 2004; Kunapuli et al, 2007). Our GeoChip results demonstrated that there is a great potential for intrinsic bioremediation of oil contamination in the deep-sea environment. Anaerobic HC degradation associated with sulfate reduction, denitrification and methanogenesis has long been considered the prevailing mechanism for petroleum biodegradation in the deep subsurface (Head et al, 2003; Aitken et al, 2004; Kniemeyer et al, 2007; Jones et al, 2008). Recent investigations have demonstrated that several classes of petroleum HCs, including alkanes (So et al, 2003), mono- and polycyclic aromatic compounds (Meckenstock et al, 2000; Widdel and Rabus, 2001), and short-chain HCs (Kniemeyer et al, 2007), can be degraded anaerobically under nitrate-, iron- or sulfate-reducing conditions, or under methanogenic conditions (Harayama et al, 2004; Jones et al, 2008). Indeed, a substantial number of dsrA/B genes for sulfate reduction, mcrA genes for methanogenesis, narG, nirS, nirK and nosZ responsible for denitrification and populations for metal reduction were detected in this study. Also, dsrA/B and mcrA genes showed significantly (P<0.05 or 0.01) higher abundance in the plume than in the non-plume samples. In addition, bbs genes for the strict anaerobic toluene degradation were detected and enriched in the plume samples. It is possible that anaerobic HC degradation could have most likely occured through microaggregate formation as reported in Hazen et al (2010). Hydrocarbon degradation is generally limited by nutrient availability, which can be improved by nutrient recycling through phage-mediated biomass turnover (Jiang et al, 1998; Head et al, 2006; Paul, 2008). As significant biomass increase was observed (Hazen et al, 2010) in the plume samples, bacteriophages could have critical roles in HC degradation. Approximately 43% of marine bacterial isolates have been found to contain prophages (Jiang et al, 1998; Paul, 2008), which are induced by various environmental contaminants, such as fuel oil (Cochran et al, 1998). The oil spill may stimulate the growth of pathogenic bacteria in marine environments and many pathogens are capable of efficiently degrading HCs (Rojo and Martínez, 2010). The research on phages has been heavily slanted to those that affect human-related activities, health/medical and industry. As no target genes for Oceanospirillum phages were designed on GeoChip 4.0, the Oceanospirillum phages were not detected. Genes for both iron uptake (iro) and adherence (pap and pilin) were significantly (P<0.01 or 0.05) enriched in the plume samples. The increase in the abundance of microorganisms capable of producing siderophores, highly specific iron-chelating compounds, may facilitate microbial acquisition of iron, a limiting nutrient in marine systems (Barbeau et al, 2001a, 2001b), thereby potentially increasing HC degradation. A substantial quantity of methane gas was released together with the oil (The Federal Interagency Solutions Group, Oil Budget Calculator Science and Engineering Team, November 2010; Kessler et al, 2011), which may result in more methane in the oil plume ecosystem and have the potential to greatly impact methane metabolism. GeoChip targets three key genes/enzymes involved in methane metabolism, with mcrA encoding methyl coenzyme M reductase for methanogenesis and two enzymes/genes (methane monooxygenase/mmoX and particulate methane monooxygenase/pmoA) for methanotrophy (He et al, 2010). In this study, pmoA and mmoX genes for aerobic methane oxidation did not show a statistically significant change though their abundance was higher in plume samples than in non-plume samples. There are two possible explanations for this: one is that the aerobic methane oxidation was inhibited owing to the presence of easier to degrade alkanes in the deep sea, and the other is that the methane gas was moved up to the surface more directly and did not accumulate in the deep oil plume. Also, unlike propane, methane may form gas hydrates at the deep plume temperature and pressure, making it unavailable to microorganisms (Valentine et al, 2010). However, significantly (P<0.05) higher signal intensities were observed for mcrA in the plume than non-plume samples, indicating that those enriched mcrA genes derived from methanogens likely link to HC degradation rather than plume methane release (Harayama et al, 2004; Jones et al, 2008). Enzymes or genes involved in anaerobic methane oxidation, however, remain unclear; thus, we could not detect this functional process. In this study, many functional genes were detected in the uncontaminated samples that were not detected in the contaminated samples (Supplementary Table S3 and Supplementary Figure S10). These results suggest that oil spills can select against those populations containing these genes, or that specific members of the community have a selective advantage if they are capable of HC degradation and these grow to represent a greater proportion of the functional gene repertoire. In conclusion, our results indicate that a variety of HC-degrading functional genes were enriched in response to oil contamination and associated environmental changes. 