The initial concentration of MTBE added was ca. 50 mg/L. Short arrows indicate re-addition of MTBE. The long arrow indicates re-addition of MTBE and Fe(III) oxide. In the other two replicates of the HS-amended sediments, the concentration of MTBE was ca. 17 mg/L after the first 275 days of incubation. Additional MTBE was added to these sediments and the loss of MTBE was monitored over time. MTBE was degraded without a lag in both of these sediment samples (Figure 2), but at a slower rate than the other sediment sample of the triplicate series (Figure 1). Sediments amended with the humics analog, AQDS, and Fe(III) degraded approximately 60% of the MTBE, but none of the replicates went below detectable levels (data not shown). figure Figure 2 Anaerobic loss of MTBE in the remaining two replicates of the aquifer sediment enrichments that had been adapted to MTBE for 275 days and comparable killed controls. The initial concentration of MTBE added was ca. 50 mg/L. Killed control data are the means of triplicate analyses. The potential for anaerobic degradation of MTBE, as well as TBA, was evaluated in freshwater aquatic sediments from the Potomac River. When freshly collected sediments were amended with [2-14C]-acetate, both 14CH4 and 14CO2 were produced over time. When molybdate was added to inhibit sulfate reduction in the sediments, the rate of 14CO2 produc tion was diminished with an increase in the production of 14CH4, but there was still significant 14CO2 production. The sediments contained ca. 10.8 μmol of HCl-extractable Fe(III), and ca. 85 μmol of Fe(II) per gram (dry weight) of sediment. These results, coupled with there being no detectable nitrate, indicated that methane production, sulfate reduction, and Fe(III) reduction were taking place simultaneously in the sediments (19). There was an immediate loss of the TBA added to Potomac River sediments that had received no other amendments (Figure 3). When TBA was added back to the sediments it continued to be degraded over time. When [14C]-TBA was added to the sediments it was converted to 14CO2 and 14CH4 (Figure 4). figure Figure 3 Anaerobic loss of TBA in sediment from the Potomac River. The initial concentration of TBA added was ca. 50 mg/L. Arrows indicate re-addition of TBA. Data are the means of triplicate analyses. Figure 4 Anaerobic production of 14CO2 and 14CH4 from [14C]-TBA in sediment from the Potomac River. 