The strains JJ and RCB, belonging to the genus Dechloromonas, were originally isolated using humic substances and nitrate (JJ), or chlorobenzoate and chlorate (RCB) as electron donors and acceptors respectively (Coates et al., 2001). Kasai and colleagues (2006) identified a phylotype affiliated to the genus Azoarcus for assimilation of benzene with nitrate as electron acceptor in an RNA-SIP experiment targeting gasoline-contaminated groundwater. The authors than isolated several pure strains out of the groundwater using a non-selective medium and were able to identify two Azoarcus strains as nitrate-reducing benzene degraders in subsequent experiments with 14C-labelled benzene (Kasai et al., 2006). Tan and colleagues (2006) and Weelink and colleagues (2007) enriched a chlorate-reducing benzene-degrading culture. Later, a strain belonging to Alicycliphilus denitrificans was isolated that was able to mineralize benzene with chlorate as electron acceptor (Weelink et al., 2008). However, in the last step of the chlorate reduction pathway, chlorite dismutates to oxygen and chloride. Biochemical and physiological data suggest that this bacterium uses the oxygen released during chlorate reduction as a co-substrate for the initial attack and ring cleavage of benzene; thus it cannot be regarded as a true anaerobic benzene degrader. Benzene degradation by chlorate reduction is excellently and extensively described in the recent review of Weelink and colleagues (2010). Mechanisms of anaerobic benzene activation The question how benzene is activated in the absence of oxygen is still not convincingly answered, although several attempts have been made since the end of the 1980s to elucidate the activation mechanism. In principle, the benzene molecule is thermodynamically very stable due to the symmetric π-electron system of the aromatic ring and the lack of potentially destabilizing or reactive substituents. Many alkylated aromatic hydrocarbons, e.g. toluene and xylenes, are activated under anoxic conditions by a reaction sequence in which fumarate is added to the alkyl side-chain of the aromatic ring (for a review see Heider, 2007). In the first step of this reaction, a relatively stable benzyl radical is thought to be formed. One might suggest that benzene is activated by a similar mechanism; however, the formation of a phenyl radical as a reactive intermediate for a subsequent methylation or other reaction is rather unlikely for energetic reasons. The abstraction of a hydrogen atom from benzene would need an activation energy of more than 460 kJ mol−1 which is roughly 100 kJ mol−1 more compared with the formation of a benzyl radical from alkylated benzene derivatives (Widdel and Rabus, 2001; Musat and Widdel, 2008). Thus, three other activation mechanisms have been intensively discussed: (i) an anaerobic hydroxylation of benzene yielding phenol, (ii) a Friedel-Crafts-type methylation of benzene yielding toluene and (iii) a carboxylation of benzene yielding benzoate (Fig. 2). We will discuss the pros and cons for all three possible activation reactions. Generally, isotope-based methods have been used to elucidate the reaction mechanism, either by CSIA, or by detection of 13C- or 14C-labelled metabolites which are formed during transformation of 13C- or 14C-labelled benzene. Due to the lack of pure cultures, most studies aiming to elucidate the reaction mechanism were performed with enrichment cultures. Benzene hydroxylation Benzene hydroxylation by hydroxyl ions stemming from water is an attractive model for benzene activation as the redox potential for this reaction is comparably low (E°′ = −0.09 V; Musat and Widdel, 2008) and hence likely possible even under sulfate-reducing or methanogenic conditions. Phenol itself has been shown to be mineralized by facultative and strictly anaerobic bacteria; the degradation pathway proceeds via a carbon dioxide-dependent carboxylation of the aromatic ring to 4-hydroxybenzoate and further transformation to benzoyl-CoA (Bak and Widdel, 1986; Knoll and Winter, 1987; Tschech and Fuchs, 1987; Lovley and Lonergan, 1990; Zhang and Wiegel, 1994; Qiu et al., 2008; Schleinitz et al., 2009). Hydroxylation of benzene had been already suggested as an initial reaction mechanism for benzene activation in one of the first reports regarding anaerobic benzene degradation (Vogel and Grbic-Galic, 1986). Addition of 18O-labelled water resulted in the formation of 18O-labelled phenol, indicating that the introduced hydroxyl group originated from water. In subsequent reports, phenol was often detected in enrichments as metabolite of benzene degradation under different electron acceptor conditions: in iron-reducing cultures (Caldwell and Suflita, 2000; Botton and Parsons, 2007; Kunapuli et al., 2008), sulfate-reducing cultures (Caldwell and Suflita, 2000; Laban et al., 2009) and methanogenic cultures (Weiner and Lovley, 1998b; Caldwell and Suflita, 2000; Ulrich et al., 2005). In some studies, benzoate was concomitantly detected with phenol (Caldwell and Suflita, 2000; Ulrich et al., 2005; Kunapuli et al., 2008). It is noteworthy that it has recently been observed that phenol can be abiotically formed from benzene in culture media from iron and sulfate reducers by contact with air after sampling (Kunapuli et al., 2008). Hydroxyl radicals were likely generated by oxidation of iron in the sample during work up, which then reacted rapidly with benzene producing small amounts of phenol before sample analysis. The formation of 2-hydroxybenzoate and 4-hydroxybenzoate from benzoate was also explained by these mechanisms (Laban et al., 2009). 