These results indicate that it is generally problematic to distinguish between biotic and abiotic phenol formation in strongly reduced culture samples, probably preventing any clear evidence for benzene hydroxylation under strictly anoxic conditions by means of metabolite analysis. Hence, other methodological approaches are needed in addition. Substrate consumption tests with two highly enriched sulfate-reducing benzene-degrading cultures revealed that phenol is either not consumed (Laban et al., 2009) or only consumed after a certain lag-phase (Musat and Widdel, 2008), strongly indicating that phenol is unlikely to be an intermediate during benzene degradation in these cultures. Chakraborty and Coates (2005) suggested that Dechloromonas strain RCB hydroxylated benzene to phenol, which was subsequently transformed to benzoate; the reaction was dependent on the presence of nitrate as electron acceptor. Here, the authors did not report phenol formation or benzene degradation in anoxic, nitrate-free control cultures amended with benzene. The origin of the introduced hydroxyl group could not be identified. When cells degraded benzene in H218O-enriched mineral salt medium, the formed phenol was only slightly enriched with 18O, suggesting that the hydroxyl group did not originate from water. On the other hand, hydroxyl free radical scavengers strongly inhibited benzene degradation and phenol formation, indicating that hydroxyl radicals were the source of the hydroxyl group in phenol. In an additional study, Chakraborty and colleagues (2005) showed that strain RCB could degrade benzene and several other aromatic hydrocarbons with nitrate, chlorate or oxygen as electron acceptor. Surprisingly, none of the known genes for anaerobic degradation of aromatic compounds could be found in the genome of strain RCB, which was recently sequenced (Salinero et al., 2009). Due to the lack of these genes, anaerobic benzene degradation in strain RCB ‘remains enigmatic’ (Salinero et al., 2009). On the other hand, strain RCB encodes several aerobic pathways for aromatics degradation. In the presence of chlorate, this organism releases oxygen during chlorate respiration allowing aromatics degradation by means of oxygenases even in the initial absence of oxygen in the culture medium, as shown also for the chlorate-reducing benzene degrader Alicycliphilus denitrificans (Weelink et al., 2008). Interestingly, it has been recently demonstrated that oxygen can be released during reduction of nitric oxide (NO) (Ettwig et al., 2010), an intermediate of the classical nitrate reduction pathway to dinitrogen. As also suggested by Weelink and colleagues (2010), strain RCB may contain this enzyme, allowing the use of oxygen for the initial attack of benzene and other aromatics even under nitrate-reducing conditions, explaining the apparently inconsistent physiological and genetic data. Unfortunately, the oxygen-releasing enzyme has not been characterized and can therefore not yet be identified in the genome of strain RCB. The genome of strain RCB contains the genes for the classical nitrate reduction to dinitrogen pathway, including those for nitric oxide reductase which catalyses nitric oxide reduction to nitrous oxide (N2O) (Salinero et al., 2009). Benzene methylation Benzene methylation via Friedel-Crafts-type reaction is exergonic using the unique biological methyl donors S-adenosyl-methionine or methyl-tetrahydrofolate (Coates et al., 2002), which open the doors for another hypothesis for anaerobic benzene activation. Actually, S-adenosyl-methione-dependent alkylation of benzene (and substituted aromatics) has been observed in bone marrow (Flesher and Myers, 1991). Methylation has been also proposed for the anaerobic activation of the non-substituted aromatic hydrocarbon naphthalene (Safinowski and Meckenstock, 2006). If benzene is methylated by anaerobes, the reaction product toluene could be further activated by addition of fumarate to the methyl group of toluene catalysed by the enzyme benzylsuccinate synthase (BSS), leading to the characteristic compound benzylsuccinate as intermediate. BSS has been detected in several anaerobic toluene-degrading pure and mixed cultures, and fumarate addition seems to be a unique activation mechanism for anaerobic toluene degradation (for an overview see Heider, 2007). PCR primers for the gene encoding the protein subunit which contains the reactive centre, bssA, have been also developed (Winderl et al., 2007). Thus, reasonable strategies for verifying benzene activation by methylation are detecting the intermediates toluene and benzylsuccinate or detecting the presence or expression of bssA-like genes or the induction or activity of BSS. Ulrich and colleagues (2005) detected [ring-13C]-labelled toluene and [ring-13C]-labelled benzoate as intermediates in [13C6]-benzene-spiked nitrate-reducing and methanogenic enrichment cultures. The formation of [13C6]-phenol was observed only in the methanogenic culture. The nitrate-reducing culture degraded toluene rapidly and at higher rates than benzene, supporting the hypothesis that toluene might be an intermediate during benzene degradation in this culture. In contrast, toluene was only slightly degraded by the methanogenic culture. The authors concluded that two degradation pathways exist: (i) a methylation pathway leading to toluene with subsequent transformation to benzoate operating in the nitrate-reducing and methanogenic culture, and (ii) a hydroxylation pathway leading to phenol with subsequent formation of benzoate operating only in the methanogenic culture. 