There is no questioning the value of retrieving expressed genes (that is, mRNA) or synthesized polypeptides from the environment, which are involved in growth on a particular compound. Once these methods are developed and optimized, we anticipate that both mRNA-SIP and polypeptide-SIP will serve as sensitive and powerful tools, assisting in novel environmental gene discovery and complementing experiments that use RNA-SIP and DNA-SIP. SIP-based studies have largely focussed on the discovery of taxonomic and functional gene sequences associated with labelled nucleic acid. Understandably, the environments and substrates being examined yield surprising glimpses into organisms involved in substrate metabolism. A few examples include the possible involvement of Acidobacteria in methanol metabolism (Radajewski et al, 2000), a possible role for Betaproteobacteria in CH4 oxidation (Morris et al, 2002), the implication of a Thauera sp. in phenol degradation (Manefield et al, 2002), and the role of methanogenic Archaea in consuming plant exudates (Lu and Conrad, 2005). However, SIP experiments offer more than an insight into unknown and uncultured contributors to substrate metabolism. Importantly, the retrieval and characterization of sequences belonging to extant cultured isolates and characterized strains suggests that the organisms we study in the laboratory are involved in relevant processes in the natural environment. As the use of SIP in microbial ecology increases, we anticipate a shift from discovery-driven science to hypothesis-testing experimentation. The questions SIP may be used to answer will gradually shift from 'who eats what?' to 'who eats what, where and when?'. Instead of simply determining which organisms consume a specific substrate in a particular soil, we anticipate that the effects of pH, depth, latitude, altitude or temperature on active microbes will be elucidated. Such experiments would be best served by carrying out SIP alongside ecosystem process measurements, demonstrating the relevance of substrate concentrations and metabolic rates while identifying and characterizing functionally relevant microorganisms. With substantial research interest focussed on climate change, ecosystem loss and human health, linking active organisms with their preferred C- and N-sources will remain a strong research incentive in microbial ecology, one for which SIP can play an ever-expanding role. Top of page FISH-MAR The adoption of FISH for microbial ecology involved the use of 16S or 23S rRNA-targeted gene probes to detect single microbial cells from within a complex microbial community (reviewed by Wagner et al, 2003). This enabled image analysis-assisted quantification of microbes in the environment (Daims et al, 2006) and the visualization of cells relative to one another, revealing information about spatial structuring and physical interactions that occur in highly aggregated environments, such as biofilms (Gieseke et al, 2001) and activated sludge flocs (Maixner et al, 2006). By quickly exposing an environmental sample to a low dose of radioactively labelled substrate, slides prepared for FISH analysis can also be used to expose an autoradiographic emulsion for several days, causing silver grains to form in areas immediately adjacent to radioactive cells. Now referred to as FISH-MAR, this approach, which requires much shorter incubation times than DNA-SIP, was first demonstrated in 1999 (Lee et al, 1999; Ouverney and Fuhrman, 1999). Since then, FISH-MAR has provided many direct cultivation-independent links between the phylogeny and function of individual microbial cells in various natural and man-made ecosystems (reviewed by Wagner et al, 2006). At present, FISH-MAR can target up to seven different bacterial populations (Amann et al, 1996), uses 'hierarchical' probe combinations to reduce the possibility of false-positive signals (Loy et al, 2007) and has an optical resolution of 0.5–2 mum (Nielsen et al, 2003b), ideal for individual microbial cells. Further, the number of silver grains formed adjacent to individual cells provides a quantitative estimate of the contributions of different cells to substrate metabolism (Nielsen et al, 2003a). In oligotrophic environments, physiologically active cells may contain low rRNA copy numbers and be undetectable with standard FISH techniques. This limitation can be overcome by use of catalysed reporter deposition with horseradish peroxidase-labelled probes (CARD-FISH), which can also be combined with MAR (MICRO-CARD-FISH) (Sintes and Herndl, 2006). Recently, the uptake of radiolabelled substrate into FISH-identified bacterial populations was monitored by beta microimaging instead of MAR (Gieseke et al, 2005). This elegant approach offers quantitative data without the need of counting silver grains, but suffers from a relatively low spatial resolution of about 10 mum, which is above the single-cell level. Therefore, this technique is currently only suitable for application to well-structured microbial communities like those found in biofilms (Gieseke et al, 2005), microbial mats and anaerobic granules (Collins et al, 2005). A strength of FISH-MAR is that the detection of labelled substrate incorporation does not rely on a specific biomarker. This feature increases the sensitivity of the approach and enables the detection of certain physiological activities, like the incorporation of added substrate into intracellular storage compounds (Wagner and Loy, 2002), which cannot be monitored with SIP techniques. On the other hand, FISH-MAR is limited by the availability and affordability of radiolabelled substrates. 