Anaerobic biodegradation of saturated and aromatic hydrocarbons Abstract Saturated and aromatic hydrocarbons are wide-spread in our environment. These compounds exhibit low chemical reactivity and for many decades were thought to undergo biodegradation only in the presence of free oxygen. During the past decade, however, an increasing number of microorganisms have been detected that degrade hydrocarbons under strictly anoxic conditions. Introduction Compounds that consist exclusively of carbon and hydrogen are termed hydrocarbons. Because of the lack of functional groups, hydrocarbons are largely apolar and exhibit low chemical reactivity at room temperature. Differences in their reactivities are primarily determined by the occurrence, type and arrangement of unsaturated bonds (π-bonds). It is, therefore, common to classify hydrocarbons according to their bonding features into four groups: the alkanes (saturated hydrocarbons), alkenes, alkynes, and aromatic hydrocarbons. Within each of the groups of non-aromatic (aliphatic) hydrocarbons we can further distinguish between straight-chain (e.g., n-alkanes), branched-chain and cyclic (alicyclic) compounds. Aromatic hydrocarbons may be mono- or polycyclic, and many important compounds in this class also contain aliphatic hydrocarbon chains (e.g., alkylbenzenes). The availability of hydrocarbons as fuels and starting compounds for a vast range of chemical syntheses is of fundamental importance for our industrialised civilisation. Nearly all of these hydrocarbons are of natural origin or chemically synthesised directly from natural hydrocarbons. Hydrocarbons are naturally formed by long-term geochemical reactions of buried biomass or as metabolites in living organisms. Hence, anthropogenic activity has not introduced hydrocarbons as a novel class of compounds into the environment, but rather led to an increase in their accumulation; this can be deleterious as in the case of oil spills 1. ; 2.. The presence of hydrocarbons in the biosphere throughout the history of life may explain why many microorganisms have acquired pathways to make use of these compounds as growth substrates (Fig. 1). The study of such microorganisms is of basic scientific (e.g., biochemical), environmental and biotechnological interest. Bacteria and fungi that utilise hydrocarbons in the presence of oxygen have been known since the beginning of the 20th century. The fact that oxygen is not available in all environments where hydrocarbons occur (e.g., in deep sediments and in oil reservoirs) has repeatedly evoked the question as to whether or not the biodegradation of hydrocarbons is possible under anoxic conditions, and if so to what extent. It was not until the late 1980s that novel types of microorganisms were definitively shown to degrade hydrocarbons under strictly anoxic conditions (Fig. 1). So far, studies have shown that these microorganisms activate hydrocarbons by unprecedented biochemical mechanisms that differ completely from those employed in aerobic hydrocarbon metabolism. The present article focuses on saturated and aromatic hydrocarbons, which are the main constituents of gas and oil [3]. For information about anaerobic degradation of alkenes and alkynes, the reader is referred to other overview articles 4. Formation of aliphatic and aromatic hydrocarbons Biological formation Among hydrocarbons formed by living organisms, one may distinguish between compounds with (assumed) protective or other advantageous functions and degradation products mostly from energy metabolism (i.e., ‘exhaust’ products). The majority of biogenic hydrocarbons of the first category are alkenes and include the enormous variety of monoterpenes found in higher plants; monoterpenes may function as deterrents, inhibitors of fungal or bacterial growth or attractants, but often their role is unknown. Saturated and aromatic hydrocarbons may also have an advantageous function in living organisms. Various n-alkanes or simple methyl-branched alkanes have been detected in bacteria, plants [6], and animals. Highly methyl-branched alkanes derived from isoprene units are common in archaea [9]. One may speculate that certain alkanes stabilise lipid membranes or increase the water-repelling effect of protective waxes. 