The organic carbon in estimated oil reserves [3] amounts to ∼0.23×1012 tonnes of carbon. The geochemical transformation processes leading to the formation of hydrocarbons are extremely complex, and the literature in the field of organic geochemistry should be consulted for details. Early defunctionalisation and condensation reactions of sedimented and buried biomass at moderate temperature, termed diagenesis (sometimes including biodegradative reactions), lead to the formation of structurally highly complex polymers designated kerogen. Kerogen in sediments of various ages is by far the most abundant form of organic carbon on our planet. The total mass of kerogen corresponds to greater than 1015 tonnes of carbon [3]; this is much more than the amount that could reduce all of the free oxygen on our planet. Reactions at higher temperature (and pressure), termed katagenesis, increase the hydrophobic character of kerogen by further defunctionalisation, and release parts of the organic carbon as aliphatic and aromatic hydrocarbons. High-temperature and high-pressure reactions at deep sites, termed metagenesis, finally lead to the production of methane and CO2, and/or to native carbon. In conclusion, organic carbon from geochemical transformation also approaches its energetically final state, but this happens via reactions that are far less specific, less complete and much slower than those of anaerobic microbial processes. An important difference between microbial and geochemical carbon transformation is the pronounced production in the latter process of chemically sluggish, numerous non-methane hydrocarbons as a ‘pre-final’, metastable state (Fig. 2). Still, there is the open question as to whether or not microorganisms are involved in the production of some non-methane hydrocarbons. Hydrocarbon-degrading anaerobic bacteria and their activation mechanisms In aerobic bacteria growing on hydrocarbons, O2 is not only the terminal electron acceptor for respiratory energy conservation, but also an indispensable reactant in the activation mechanism. By the action of monooxygenases (on aliphatic and certain aromatic hydrocarbons) or dioxygenases (on aromatic hydrocarbons), one or two oxygen atoms, respectively, are directly incorporated from O2 leading to hydroxylated products. The realisation that enzymatically activated oxygen as a strong oxidant is used to overcome the chemical sluggishness of hydrocarbons has for some decades favoured the view that hydrocarbons are not biodegradable under anoxic conditions. However, since the late 1980s, an increasing number of novel microorganisms have been shown to utilise saturated and aromatic hydrocarbons as growth substrates under strictly anoxic conditions. These microorganisms use nitrate, ferric iron or sulphate as electron acceptors for anaerobic respiration, grow in syntrophic cocultures with other anaerobes or grow by anoxygenic photosynthesis (Fig. 1, Fig. 4). Methane, the smallest and most stable hydrocarbon, is oxidized by archaea in a syntrophic association with sulphate-reducing bacteria (SRB). There is no biochemical agent under anoxic conditions that exhibits the properties of the oxygen species involved in aerobic hydrocarbon activation; hence, the mechanisms of anaerobic hydrocarbon activation have to be completely different from oxygenase reactions. Indeed, all of the anaerobic activation reactions of hydrocarbons are mechanistically unprecedented in biochemistry. Methane In marine sediments, methane diffusing upwards from deep zones often disappears long before any contact with oxygen is possible. This anaerobic methane consumption is accompanied by sulphate reduction to sulphide at distinct rates. Residual methane is 13C-enriched, again indicating biological consumption [31]. In addition, inorganic carbon (CO2, HCO3−, CO32−) in the zone of methane depletion is relatively depleted in 13C [31]; this suggests that CO2 from the oxidation of isotopically light methane dilutes the isotopically heavier background of inorganic carbon. Upon addition of 14C-labelled methane to anoxic marine sediment, the formation of radioactive CO2 could be measured 30.; 31. ;. To date, no microorganism has been isolated that carries out a net oxidation of methane with electron acceptors other than O2. A partial conversion of 14CH4 to 14CO2 during the net production of methane has been measured in cultures of methanogenic archaea, suggesting a certain reversibility of methanogenesis. Studies with marine sediment led to the conclusion that anaerobic oxidation of methane is mediated in a consortium of archaea and SRB, with the former converting methane to CO2 and H2 and the latter scavenging H2 by oxidation with sulphate [32]. 