Such investigations elucidate the possibilities and limits of anaerobic bioremediation and deepen our understanding of microbial processes in sediments and oil fields. Another important outcome is the recognition of novel reaction mechanisms that are unprecedented in biochemistry and that might be of heuristic value for biomimetic approaches to the development of catalysts. It is true that a variety of catalysts and chemical reactions are successfully applied in petrochemistry. However, chemically catalysed reactions of hydrocarbons are usually of low specificity and not suited to the efficient synthesis of pure substances, whereas biological hydrocarbon activation and subsequent reactions are specific. On the other hand, biological alkane activation especially under anoxic conditions is slow: the rates observed in anaerobes are in the range 1 mmol hydrocarbon/h/g total cell protein [5] (the rate for pure active enzyme may be a factor of >10 higher). The unique mechanistic aspects of the anaerobic biological activation of hydrocarbons, especially of alkanes, become evident if compared with known chemical or aerobic biological reactions. The formation of functionalized products from alkanes, as the least reactive hydrocarbons, requires very harsh conditions or special catalysts for activation 108.; 109.; 110.; 111.; 112. ; 113., as a few examples will demonstrate. Alkanes can be chemically activated by highly reactive free radicals, such a(e.g., from photolysis of Cl2)H (e.g., from H2O2 and Fe2+); the formed alkyl radicals undergo further reactions (often chain reactions) leading to chlorinated or functionalized products, respectively [108]. Among ionic mechanisms, the attack of alkanes with superacids has gained much attention 109. ; 110.. Carbonium ions (>C+[H2]−) formed by protic superacids decay to carbenium ions (>C+−) and H2; carbenium ions, which tend to undergo rearrangements, can add to nonhydrocarbon molecules and thus lead to the formation of functionalized products 109.; 110.; 111. ; 112.. Since the 1970s, an increasing number of transition metal complexes have been shown to react with the C–H bonds of alkanes. In comprehensive presentations of the subject, high-valent and low-valent metal complexes have been distinguished 110. ; 111.. Reactions with metal complexes can also lead to functionalized products. Functionalization usually involves a strong oxidant, such as a high-valent metal complex with an oxygen atom as ligand, or requires another ‘driving force’ such as light in the carbonylation of alkanes to aldehydes with a low-valent metal (e.g., rhodium) complex. Monooxygenases, the biological catalysts in aerobic alkane functionalization, present high-valent metal complexes of iron that reach formal oxidation states of Fe(IV) or Fe(V) 110.; 111. ; 112.. The active oxygen atom is formed by partial reduction and cleavage of O2 bound to an Fe centre, which may be mononuclear (P450 and other monooxygenases) or dinuclear (methane monooxygenase). The oxygen atom either abstracts a hydrogen atom from the alkane, with subsequent reaction of H radical with the alkyl radical to form the alcohol (rebound mechanism) or inserts directly into the C–H bond to yield the alcohol; the assumption of the latter mechanism is favoured in the case of methane. Bacteria that oxidize alkanes anaerobically live at normal temperatures often in reducing (e.g., sulphidic) environments where no agents with oxidizing properties similar to those of oxygen species or high oxidation states of iron (>III) can be generated. These bacteria must nonetheless harbor enzymes with ‘harsh’ and/or catalytically unique reaction centres to overcome the sluggishness of the substrate. Despite this, the initial activation step must not be energetically expensive. In particular, methane-oxidizing consortia and sulphate-reducers or syntrophs (in association with methanogens) gain little energy from the overall reactions and therefore cannot dissipate much energy for substrate activation. From this point of view, the radical mechanism involving fumarate appears an elegant solution for several types of hydrocarbons (Fig. 6), and even for polar aromatic compounds with methyl groups . The overall reaction of hydrocarbon addition to fumarate is clearly in favour of the product (ΔG0∼−30 kJ mol−1), but is by no means extremely exergonic (‘dissipative’) like alkane activation with O2 (e.g., C3H8 + O2 + NADH + H+ → C3H7OH + H2O + NAD+; ΔG=−371 kJ mol−1). The anaerobic oxidation of methane with sulphate with its very low net energy gain may require an initial reaction that is even less exergonic than that of higher alkanes (or might need coupling to an energy-conserving mechanism), and thus may have to operate close to equilibrium. This postulate is in favour of an activation that is, or resembles, a reversal of methanogenesis. The final step in methanogenesis is thought to be the liberation of CH4 from a Ni(II)–CH3 centre by protonation [16]. Even if there are arguments against an exact reversal of this mechanism—of methane deprotonation (hypothetical pKa value is as high as 48 [108])—a nickel centre (or the same nickel centre) as in the formation of methane may be involved. This type of methane activation would be the biological equivalent of the chemical alkane activation with a low-valent metal complex (see above). In analogy with the activation of H2 by hydrogenase, which has almost the same bond energy as the C–H bond in methane (but can be readily activated due to the non-directed H–H bond [112]), such a methane-activating enzyme would deserve the designation methanase. 