The biosynthesis of alkanes is poorly understood. The predominance of C-odd chains among n-alkanes suggests synthesis from common C-even fatty acids by loss of the carboxyl group. However, simple decarboxylation of a saturated fatty acid is very unlikely from a mechanistic point of view. 1-Alkene biosynthesis from saturated fatty acids by hydrogen and carboxyl group elimination in an aerobic radical mechanism has been demonstrated [10]. Alkane formation by subsequent saturation of the non-activated double bond would again be difficult to explain on the basis of known enzyme mechanisms. On the other hand, it has been suggested that alkanes (R–H) in plants are produced from aldehydes (R–CH=O, from fatty acid reduction) via hydrogen-atom abstraction, decarbonylation of the acyl radicals and the readdition of hydrogen by involvement of a cobalt tetrapyrrole [11]. The occurrence of such a cofactor in plants would be unique; the only known cobalt tetrapyrrole, coenzyme B12, has otherwise never been detected in plants (J Rétey, personal communication). Aromatic hydrocarbons with an assumed protective function are p-isopropyltoluene (also called p-cymene) in plants [12] and naphthalene produced by a termite [13]. By far the most important hydrocarbon among biological degradation products is methane. There is much debate about a biological versus geochemical origin of methane in various reservoirs 3. Biological origin is evident from a low 13C/12C isotope ratio. The globally most important methane reservoirs are presumably gas hydrates; from their estimated volumes, a content of around 10×1012 tonnes carbon can be calculated. Biological methane is produced by diverse, strictly anaerobic archaea. They utilise acetate and biogenic C1 compounds (methanol, methylamines and methylsulphides) that undergo net-dismutation reactions, or CO2 that is reduced with H2 or other hydrogen donors from fermentation processes. Via fermentative, syntrophic and methanogenic microorganisms, biomass can in principle be completely converted to methane and CO2[9]. The process as a whole can be viewed as a gradual defunctionalisation and dismutation of the original biomolecules. Reactions continue until the final, thermodynamically stable states of carbon are reached in the form of methane and CO2 (Fig. 2, Fig. 3). Methanogenic communities thus obtain the maximum free energy available from carbon compounds in the absence of external electron acceptors. Even aromatic or saturated hydrocarbons can be converted by microbial associations to methane. The formation of ethane and higher gaseous alkanes from natural or added ethyl compounds or higher alkyl compounds, respectively, has been observed in natural microbial communities and in cultures of methanogens; however, these hydrocarbons were only found in trace concentrations. Aromatic hydrocarbons can also be formed as biological degradation products. Tolumonasauensis converts phenylacetate (produced from the fermentative breakdown of phenylalanine) during mixotrophic growth to toluene [24]. This reaction is formally a decarboxylation, but the mechanism is not understood. The anaerobic production of p-cymene from alkenoic and oxygen-containing monoterpenes under conditions of methanogenesis provides another example of the biological formation of an aromatic hydrocarbon from degradation reactions [25]. Geochemical formation Saturated and aromatic hydrocarbons are formed over geological periods by the reactions of buried biomass, especially in marine sediments. Locally intense hydrocarbon production has led to the formation of oil and gas accumulations [3]. Saturated and aromatic hydrocarbons comprise on average ∼80% (by mass) of oil constituents. 