View larger version: In this page In a new window Download as PowerPoint Slide FIG. 1. Principal component analysis of bacterial SSU rRNA gene abundance and days since oil arrival. Dark bubbles represent visibly oil-contaminated samples, whereas light ones indicate visibly clean samples. Bubble size is relative to the number of bacterial SSU rRNA gene copies per gram of sand. Vectors represent variables used to generate the euclidean distance. SSU rRNA abundance data were initially fourth root transformed to meet the assumptions of normality. Fig. 2. View larger version: In this page In a new window Download as PowerPoint Slide FIG. 2. Linear regression analysis of the abundance of overall bacteria in comparison to the abundance of Alcanivorax spp. for each sampling trip, with the abundance determined as SSU rRNA gene copies per gram of sand. Enrichment and isolation of oil-degrading bacteria.Bacteria capable of using source oil as the sole carbon and energy source were isolated from oiled beach sands under aerobic and anaerobic conditions (Table 4). Analysis of bacterial SSU rRNA gene sequences revealed that the characterized isolates belong to 14 genera from seven orders and four classes within three phyla (Proteobacteria, Firmicutes, and Actinobacteria). The majority of the isolates were identified as members of four orders (Oceanospirilalles, Alteromonadales, Vibrionales, and Pseudomonadales) within the class Gammaproteobacteria. A single isolate was identified from the Alphaproteobacteria. Two Gram-positive organisms were isolated from the phyla Firmicutes and Actinobacteria. The SSU rRNA gene sequences of all isolates were highly similar to those retrieved from oiled sands of Pensacola Beach (Fig. 3 and Table 5). In particular, SSU rRNA gene sequences from isolates of the genera Alcanivorax, Marinobacter, Pseudoalteromonas, and Pseudomonas shared a high sequence identity (>97%) with recovered sequences from beach sands. View this table: In this window In a new window TABLE 4. Genotypic and phenotypic characterization of oil-degrading bacteria isolated from beach sands impacted by the DH oil spilla Fig. 3. View larger version: In this page In a new window Download as PowerPoint Slide FIG. 3. Phylogenetic comparison of SSU rRNA gene sequences from oil-degrading bacterial isolates (★) and sequences retrieved from oiled Pensacola Beach sands (boldface). Only Gammaproteobacteria lineages are included in the analysis. The most similar sequences identified by BLAST are indicated by GenBank accession number. 