A similar tree topology was observed for trees constructed by using least-squares methods (data not shown). FIG. 6. Phylogenetic analysis of 16S rRNA sequences from the uncontaminated and benzene-oxidizing sites and from enrichment cultures. Phylogenetic trees were constructed by using maximum-parsimony methods with 100 bootstrapped data sets. Bootstrap values (of 100 trees) that are greater than 50 are shown adjacent to the nodes. A total of 402 base positions were considered in the analysis. The scale bar is in fixed nucleotide substitutions per 100 sequence positions. A similar tree topology was observed for trees constructed by using least-squares methods (data not shown). ments from site IR-3 had significantly more Geobacteraceae than did the other sediments. The PLFA analysis also suggested that there was an enrichment of Geobacteraceae at site IR-3. However, the PLFA data further indicated that there was a general increase in the microbial population at site IR-3, suggesting that, in addition to Geobacteraceae, other microorganisms were also enriched at this site. Therefore, in order to more fully explore the microbial populations that might be involved in benzene degradation, the microbial community was analyzed in more detail with DGGE. Comparison of overall bacterial diversity with DGGE. Although PCR-DGGE analysis has several potential limitations (13, 18, 50), this approach was clearly effective in identifying the major shifts in the microbial community in the Bemidji aquifer. In an attempt to avoid biases, primers that targeted bacteria were employed under low-stringency conditions at annealing temperatures with a minimum number of amplification cycles. It seems likely from analysis of triplicate sediment DNA extractions that any PCR biases inherent in this approach were consistent between samples and thus differences in DGGE profiles between sites reflected major differences in the composition of the environmental DNA templates. The fairly simple DGGE patterns obtained with domainlevel primers suggests that relatively few species dominated at each of the Bemidji sites, especially at the uncontaminated site. This conclusion is also supported by community PLFA profiles, which exhibited relatively low diversity compared to surficial soils. The apparent simplicity of these subsurface microbial communities is not surprising given the low availability of organic carbon and nutrients generally found in subsurface sediments (3, 5, 16). Other studies of phylogenetic diversity in subsurface microbial communities have also indicated relatively low levels of diversity (8, 36) compared to surficial soil communities (9, 15, 41). The DGGE profiles indicated that the microbial community composition differed markedly among the aerobic, Fe(III)reducing, and methanogenic zones of the aquifer. In addition to different bands predominating in samples from each TEAP zone, more bands were recovered from all of the contaminated sediments than from the uncontaminated sediments. These results suggest that different microorganisms have a selective advantage in different TEAP zones and that the BTEX contaminants stimulated the growth of microorganisms that were not dominant members of the microbial community in the uncontaminated sediments. It is likely that dominant microorganisms that grew in response to the BTEX input were involved in BTEX degradation. However, organic matter produced by the BTEX degraders could provide substrates for the growth of lesser quantities of other organisms. Enrichment of Geobacter spp. in the zone of benzene degradation. In accord with the MPN-PCR results with Geobacteraceae primers, the DGGE analysis of the sediments with bacterial PCR primers suggested that the IR-3 sediments in which benzene was actively degraded were enriched with Geobacteraceae. 