2). However, these results must be viewed with caution because the PLFAs used in this analysis are not unique to Geobacter spp. but are also present in other gram-negative bacteria (45). Hierarchical cluster analysis of PLFAs extracted from sediment samples from IR-1, IR-2, IR-3, and the uncontaminated site. Phylogenetic diversity of sediment microbial community.PCR-DGGE analysis of triplicate sediment samples indicated that DGGE patterns from each site were consistent and reproducible (Fig.3). The DGGE patterns were clearly resolved with fewer than 25 bands per lane (Fig. 3 and4). The use of several different ranges of denaturant gradients improved the DGGE analysis and provided more-detailed focus on separate segments of the community with each different gradient (Fig. 4). DGGE profiles of bacterial 16S rDNA fragments retrieved from Bemidji sediments along the contaminant gradient. Triplicate DNA extractions were analyzed from each site. A 60 to 80% denaturant gradient range was used. DGGE analysis of 16S rDNA fragments amplified from the uncontaminated site (Uncont.) and benzene-oxidizing site IR-3 with primers that target 16S rDNAs of most bacteria in several different denaturant gradient ranges. Detailed PCR-DGGE and sequence analysis was focused on site IR-3, the most active site of anaerobic benzene degradation (4), and the uncontaminated site. There were marked differences in the DGGE profiles of bacterial 16S rDNA from the two sites (Fig. 4). The diversity of dominant bacteria appeared to be higher at site IR-3, as was evident from the fact that, regardless of the denaturant gradient, far more bands were present in DGGE profiles from site IR-3 than at the uncontaminated site. While the two sites shared several 16S rDNA fragments that were either identical or extremely closely related (Fig. 4), the majority of sequences were unique to each site. One of the most conspicuous differences between these sites was band Geo-83, which was the predominant band at site IR-3 and was not detected at the uncontaminated site. Comparative sequence analysis placed Geo-83 within the Geobacter cluster, with its closest relative beingG. chapellei (Fig. 5). Other 16S rDNA sequences detected in DGGE profiles from site IR-3, but not at the uncontaminated site, included bands Geo-125 and Geo-144 within theGeobacteraceae family (Fig. 5); Gthrx-84, most closely related to Geothrix fermentans; several beta proteobacteria (Beta-137, Beta-169, and Beta-183, most closely related toAzoarcus evansii, and Beta-142, most closely related to an unidentified toluene degrader, isolate D8 [33]); and several sequences (sequences 81, 85, 124, and 184) which appear to represent novel lineages (Fig. 6). 16S rRNA phylogenetic tree of Geobacteraceaeand delta proteobacterial sequences from the uncontaminated site and site IR-3 and from benzene-oxidizing enrichment cultures. Phylogenetic trees were constructed by using maximum-parsimony methods with 100 bootstrapped data sets. 