Enrichments for sulfate- A strain of Desulfosporosinus meridiei added as a 10% inoculum from a fresh culture. reducing bacteria that contained toluene-in-paraffin oil or benzoate were prepared from anaerobic groundwater taken from the plume; from multiports MP11 and MP2 (Figure 2) (Robertson et al. 2000). Pure cultures of sulfate-reducing bacteria were isolated using roll tubes. Phylogenetic analysis showed that all of the cultures (n = 8) could be accommodated within the genus Desulfosporosinus in the Gram positive, low G + C, line of descent (see Figure 3). The strains were described as a new species, Desulfosporosinus meridiei (Robertson et al. 2001). The extraction of DNA for PCR amplification of the 16S rDNA from the strains generally required beating with zirconium beads and generally could not be obtained by chemical lyses (Robertson et al. 2000). All of the major fatty acids that occurred in Desulfosporosinus meridiei (Robertson et al. 2000) also occurred in the phospholipid extracts of core material from the contaminated site (Franzmann et al. 1996). The cells lacked the fatty acid signatures often used as markers for sulfate reducing bacteria in environmental samples; i17:1c9 and 10-methyl-16:0. Members of the species also lacked the 16S rRNA hybridization sites for FISH probes that are commonly used for the detection of sulfate-reducing bacteria. Microcosm tests with ring-labeled 14C-benzene and 14C-toluene showed that Desulfosporosinus strains were incapable of mineralizing either compound to 14CO2 (Robertson et al. 2000). To test the role that Desulfosporosinus meridiei may have in benzene or toluene degradation, the rate of mineralisation of 14Cbenzene and 14C-toluene was determined in a series of microcosms of collected groundwater, with different additions of sulfate, cells of Desulfosporosinus meridiei or molybdate as an inhibitor of sulfate reduction. The rate of toluene mineralisation was minimal in non-amended groundwater, but was enhanced by the addition of sulfate, and further enhanced by the addition of both sulfate and cells of Desulfosporosinus meridiei (Table 4). The rate of toluene mineralisation in the microcosm that received sulfate with molybdate was slower than the mineralisation rate in non-amended groundwater. The rate of benzene mineralisation in non-amended groundwater was minimal, and was not enhanced by the addition of sulfate or sulfate with cells of Desulfosporosinus meridiei (Table 4). Interestingly, groundwater collected from outside the contamination plume showed a greater capacity for toluene mineralisation than groundwater collected from within the contamination plume (Table 4). Although the sulfate addition, and further addition of an inoculum of sulfate-reducing bacteria greatly stimulated toluene mineralisation in the microcosms, the pure culture of sulfate-reducing bacterium that was added did not mineralise toluene. It is thus probable that Desulfosporosinus meridiei plays a similar role in this plume to the role methanogens play in toluene-degrading consortia. That is, they consume the hydrogen and organic acids produced by fermentative organisms from the toluene, thus preventing the accumulation of fermentation products that would otherwise make the further degradation of toluene thermodynamically impossible (Zwolinski et al. 2000). The mineralisation rates for toluene in the groundwater microcosms were considerably slower than degradation rates measured in the field (Davis et al. 1999). Microcosms experiments always contain artifacts, and should be used only to indicate the potential microbial processes. As the PLFA analysis showed that at least 98% of the microbial biomass was substrate bound, it is not surprising that the use of Phylogenetic tree of the 16S rRNA genes of sulfate-reducing strains from a BTEX contamination plume in Western Australia, and their near relatives. 