Approximately 300 gasoline-degrading bacteria were isolated from well water and core material from a shallow coastal aquifer contaminated with unleaded gasoline. Identification of 244 isolates revealed four genera: Pseudomonas, Alcaligenes, Nocardia, and Micrococcus, with pseudomonads making up 86.9% of bacteria identified. A total of 297 isolates was sorted into 111 catabolic groups on the basis of aerobic growth responses on 15 gasoline hydrocarbons. Each test hydrocarbon was degraded by at least one isolate. Toluene, p-xylene, ethylbenzene, and 1,2,4-trimethylbenzene were most frequently utilized as growth substrates, whereas cyclic and branched alkanes were least utilized. Most isolates were able to grow on 2 or 3 different hydrocarbons, and nearly 75% utilized toluene as a sole source of carbon and energy. Isolates were remarkably specific for hydrocarbon usage, often catabolizing only one of several closely related compounds. A subset of 220 isolates was sorted into 51 groups by polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis. Pseudomonas aeruginosa was partitioned into 16 protein-banding groups (i.e., subspecies) whose catabolic activities were largely restricted to substituted aromatics. Different members of subspecies groups defined by protein-banding pattern analysis often exhibited different growth responses on the same hydrocarbon, implying marked strain diversity. The catabolic activities of well-derived, gasoline-degrading bacteria associated with this contaminated aquifer are consonant with in situ adaptation at the site. Gasoline is a complex mixture of refined petroleum hydrocarbons comprising more than 200 different compounds and stereoisomeric forms differing in their volatilities, solubilities, sorptive characteristics, and subsurface transport properties (2, 24). Some aromatic constituents of gasoline (e.g., benzene) are recognized human carcinogens whose maximum permissible concentrations in potable water supplies are federally regulated (9). Thus, gasoline hydrocarbons originating from underground leaks or surface spills pose a demonstrable threat to the public health and quality of potable groundwater resources. The low solubility of many gasoline constituents coupled with a tendency for hydrocarbons to strongly sorb to aquifer materials enhances the persistence of gasoline constituents in subsurface environments, especially if biotic processes are suppressed (2, 5, 7, 18). Many gasoline hydrocarbons have been demonstrated to be directly biodegraded (1, 2, 4-6, 13, 22, 26) or cometabolized (2, 16, 17, 23) by native groundwater microflora given appropriate inorganic nutrient supplementation. Despite exploitation of gasoline-degrading microorganisms for purposes of in situ aquifer bioremediation (2, 5, 7, 8, 10, 11, 16, 17, 27-30), there is still very little known about the ecology, taxonomy, and catabolic diversity of gasoline-degrading bacteria associated with areas of subterranean contamination (1-3, 6, 12, 13). Introduction of gasoline hydrocarbons into a previously uncontaminated subsurface environment could be expected to perturb local selective conditions, thereby inducing adaptive responses in the size, structure, physiology, and genetics of indigenous microbial communities (13). The magnitude of and time required for such adaptive changes are, at best, poorly understood. Information concerning the temporal and spatial dynamics of micro- * Corresponding author. Bial assemblages involved in gasoline hydrocarbon catabolism is critical for accurately evaluating and modeling in situ degradation rates and potentials (5, 7, 18). A primary objective of the present investigation was to explore and quantify the taxonomic and physiologic diversity of an aerobic, gasoline-degrading bacterial community associated with a shallow coastal aquifer contaminated with unleaded gasoline. In order to accomplish this goal, gasolinedegrading bacteria isolated from observation well groundwater and aquifer cores from this study site were differentiated by three independent methods: (i) determination of growth responses on 15 different hydrocarbon substrates representing the major hydrocarbon categories found in unleaded gasoline, (ii) computer-programmed sodium dodecyl sulfatepolyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) of cellular proteins followed by dendrogram analysis, and (iii) identification of isolates by conventional biochemical and nutritional testing. Results obtained by these methods were compared with one another to determine the taxonomic and catabolic diversity of the sample population as well as the potential for microbially mediated degradation of different hydrocarbon contaminants at the site. Description of study site and sampling wells. The study site consisted of a shallow coastal aquifer underlying the U.S. Naval Weapons Station in Seal Beach, Calif. The aquifer was composed primarily of silty and sandy alluvial deposits and was contaminated with 20,000 to 40,000 liters of unleaded gasoline from an underground tank (R. Schroeder, U.S. Geological Survey, San Diego, Calif., personal communication). Approximately 30 polyvinylchloride-encased observation wells perforated the aquifer to a maximum depth of about 20 feet (ca. 