Comparing the microorganisms that grow in each Biolog" well to the total community that is present in the sample might help to increase the value of substrate utilization patterns for biodiversity analysis. Molecular methods based on DNA or 16S rRNA can provide an estimate of the fraction of community members that respond to the Biolog" assay conditions. Analyses of dominant nucleic acid fragments in the Biolog" wells by temperature gradient gel electrophoresis have been shown to give evidence for a reduction in diversity and selective enrichment of a few strains in the presence of the Biolog" substrates (Smalla et aI., 1998). Several statistical approaches allow the evaluation of multivariate data, such as Biolog" substrate utilization patterns. Here, PCA has been chosen to illustrate the relationships between samples concerning their catabolic potential. PCA ordination technique separates different samples along the first and second PC, which typically account for more than 80% of the variation in the data set. The major relationships among samples are visualized by examining the relative similarity of the principal component scores of their carbon source utilization patterns. Differences among samples are analyzed by evaluating the correlation of the original variables to the principal components. Other forms of ordination are canonical correspondence analysis (Bossio and Scow, 1995; Grayston et aI., 1994). The microbial communities analyzed were all highly active in the presence of hydrocarbon contamination, confirming that the ability to utilize these compounds is widespread among microorganisms, even from environments where no hydrocarbon pollution is expected. Hydrocarbon-contaminated samples generally show higher metabolic potentials, when compared with uncontaminated samples, after the same incubation time, suggesting that microbial communities in soil are mainly limited by the available carbon. Often a high initial activity in soil samples is observed, probably due to the soil preparation, as homogenization and sieving enlarge the surface area and facilitate oxygen availability Therefore, the activity and substrate richness at the beginning of the experiments is probably overestimated. Heavy metals, especially copper and arsenic, had a drastic inhibitory effect on average activity as well as on the richness of the microorganisms according to the Biolog" analysis. Plating on rich medium, however, indicated that the cell number growing under these conditions increased. Thus, a stress-resistant population of low diversity had multiplied faster than the population in the control soil. Although aeration in a static system had no effect on the degradation rate of diesel or phenanthrene, the microbial population extracted from these soils differed greatly. Active aeration compared with oxygen supply by simple diffusion changed oxygen gradients and increased oxic sites. Thus, the degradation of hydrocarbons must have been limited by factors other than oxygen. Agitation combined with aeration greatly increases oxygen mass transfer within the soil (Saner et al., 1996a, 1996b). This suggests that oxygen was not the limiting factor for hydrocarbon degradation in this system. The addition of the basic inorganic nutrients supplied with trace elements and vitamins stimulated the metabolism as indicated by CO2 liberation and temperature increase. The fast-reacting organisms (GNplates) resulted in population changes by the second day, while slow-growing organisms hardly separated on PC analysis until day 5. 1. Use of additional specific carbon sources on Biolog MT microplates lacking the carbon source. Functional shifts might be more readily detected in contaminated samples if alternative carbon sources are selected (e.g. the contaminants or substrates that are known not to be generally utilized) (Insam, 1997). 2. Continuous recording of the kinetics of the color formation instead of end-point measurements. Such profiles could further characterize the community change over time and increase the analytical power of the method. 