All soil samples were homogenized and sieved and fractions <2 mm were used for the experiments. For artificial contamination of control soil, soil material was mixed with defined amounts of hydrocarbons or heavy metals (Table 1). These substances were sprayed on the soil using a trigger spray bottle, while the soil was mechanically mixed. Phenanthrene was pulverized in a mortar and added as a fine powder (2 g/kg). Original, pristine soil was used as a reference to assess natural changes in community composition during incubation. Soil pH was measured in 1 M KCl solution. Dry weight (dwt) was measured after drying at 105°C for 24 h. Water content (wet) and maximum water-holding capacity (WHC max) were determined by percolation with water after standing for an hour according to published methods (Alef, 1994; Alef and Nannipieri, 1995). In static incubation systems, soil samples of 1 kg were incubated in polycarbonatejars in the greenhouse at a mean temperature of 26°C and a humidity of 70% to prevent drying. The water content of the soil was kept constant at 25 to 30% (40 to 48% of maximum water-holding capacity) during incubation. Samples were taken at the beginning, 11 to 18 days, and 5 to 7 months after the addition of the pollutants, depending on the experiment (exact duration is given in the legends to figures and tables). The microorganisms were then extracted from the soil and the extract was used to inoculate the microtiter plates. Compressed air was released from the bottom into the soil at a rate of 2.5 L/min. The reaction vessels were kept at 22°C and the air was humidified by passage through a washing bottle containing sterile water. Experiments under constantly agitated and aerated conditions were performed in a specially designed 100-L bioreactor (Saner et aI., 1996a) using 22 kg of fresh soil. In this system, the soil is slowly agitated and kept homogeneous at its original water content (24%) by a planetoid mixing system. The activity of aerobic soil organisms is measured as CO 2 production and O2 uptake in the efflux by on-line mass spectrometry (PGA100, Leybold, Koln, Germany). Additionally, the soil temperature is a good indicator of general biological activity of the soil. Before the addition of the substrate hydrocarbons, the soil was mixed and aerated for 24 h. To minimize nutrition limitations in the soil, a basal medium made in distilled water was used (3.3 giL Na zHP0 4 , 1.6 giL KH zP0 4 , 0.1 giL MgS0 407HzO, 0.02 gIL CaClzoHzO, 1.0 gIL NH4CI). This basal medium was supplemented by a vitamin and trace element solution (Pfennig and Lippert, 1966). Microorganisms were extracted from the soil following the directions of Klein (1992). Ten-gram samples of fresh, sieved soil were suspended in 100 mL sterile 0.2% tetrasodium pyrophosphate solution and shaken in 250 mL flasks for 30 minutes (150 rpm) at room temperature. After sedimentation at 1 g for about 5 minutes, the supernatant was taken to represent the entire bacterial community. The diluted suspensions (sterile 0.9% NaCI-solution) were used directly to inoculate Gram-negative (ON) Biolog" plates and to determine the cell number. For actinomycetes and fungi, the suspension was diluted in a gel-forming colloid (0.2% Carageenan Type II) instead of 0.9 % NaCI. This enhances growth and keeps the cells uniformly suspended in the wells (BIOLOG, 1993, 1994). The number of viable cells was determined by standard plate count as colony-forming units (cfu) with serial dilutions and three replicates of each on R2A medium (Reasoner and Geldreich, 1985). Incubation was at room temperature, and the colonies were counted after 10 days. Substrate utilization patterns of soil microbial communities were obtained with Biolog" GN microplate test panels with three replicate suspensions from each sample. Soil suspensions were diluted 100fold with 0.9% saline to minimize background absorbance; 125 JlL were used for the inoculation of the wells. 