Screening for hydrocarbon biodegraders in a metagenomic clone library derived from Brazilian petroleum reservoirs Metagenomics has been successfully applied to isolate novel biocatalysts from diverse environments and functional screening has been used as the primary technique to identify clones carrying the desired traits. This work aimed at the construction and screening of a metagenomic library as a source of potential hydrocarbon biodegraders. A library of 31000 clones was obtained from aerobic and anaerobic enrichments generated using a biodegraded petroleum sample collected at the Potiguar Basin in Brazil as an inoculum. A total of 5000 clones were randomly selected for high throughput screening of hexadecane biodegradation, revealing 72 positive hits. These were further evaluated using gas chromatography–mass spectrometry (GC–MS), outstanding hexadecane biodegradation ability (>70%) being detected in ﬁve clones. 1. Introduction In the last few decades, the use of molecular biology methods has drastically changed our perspective on microbial diversity in nature, revealing that only a small fraction of microorganisms, from 0.001% to 15% depending on the complexity of the environment under study, can be recovered using cultivation techniques (Amann et al., 1995; Torsvik and vreås, 2002). In this context, although diverse bacteria capable of degrading petroleum hydrocarbons have been isolated and characterized, the vast majority of hydrocarbon-degrading bacteria, including anaerobes, probably remain undiscovered (Harayama et al., 2004). The major motivation of all researchers who study biodegradation is undoubtedly the search for versatile microorganisms capable of efﬁciently degrading a wide variety of pollutants at low operational cost. It has been demonstrated, however, that some hydrocarbon-derived compounds are unusually recalcitrant, meaning that they are not metabolized by microorganisms or are transformed into metabolites that can accumulate in the environment or are as toxic as the parent compound (Esteve-Nunez et al., 2001). Furthermore, the degradation pathways of many pollutants remain unknown or are poorly characterized due to re-isolation of the same species when traditional cultivation methods are used to recover pollutant-degrading microorganisms. The study and exploration of genomes of the ‘‘uncultured majority” has become possible through metagenomics, a cultureindependent molecular biology-based method that allows one to explore the metabolic potential of uncultivated species by cloning large DNA fragments isolated directly from the environment (Galvão et al., 2005; Suenaga et al., 2007). Considering that the biocatalytic potential of only 1–2% of the microorganisms in the world has been evaluated (Gomes and Steiner, 2004), metagenomic studies may offer a valuable tool for the exploration of untapped microbial diversity. Recent studies conducted by screening metagenomic libraries from diverse environmental samples have already shown the huge biocatalytic potential of diverse prokaryotes (Ferrer et al., 2005; Solbak et al., 2005). The use of metagenomics to gain access to the poorly understood petroleum reservoir environment is innovative and may reveal new enzymes (biocatalysts) of interest for biotechnological processes such as bioremediation and microbial enhancement oil recovery (MEOR). Consequently, the present study was aimed at the construction and screening of a metagenomic fosmid library from petroleum microbial enrichments to identify efﬁcient hydrocarbon biodegraders. 2. Materials and methods 2.1. Sampling and geological settings Oil samples were obtained in July 2008 from one production well at the onshore Potiguar Basin (Rio Grande do Norte, Brazil) with logistic support from CENPES/Petrobras. The sample, GMR75, used as an inoculum for the microbial enrichments, was classiﬁed as moderately biodegraded, with a biodegradation rank of 4–5 according to the Peters and Moldowan (1993) scale (Fig. 1). It was collected from a reservoir with an in situ temperature of 42.2 C and at a depth of 535.5–540.5 m. The loss of hydrocarbons in natural reservoirs as a result of biodegradation is highly variable in the Potiguar Basin; however, a recent study suggested that the GMR oil has already lost more than 50% of its light hydrocarbons (Behar et al., 2006). The Potiguar Basin is located at the Brazilian equatorial margin, covering an area of about 119,295 km2, with 33,200 km2 (27.8%) classiﬁed as onshore and 86,095 km2 as offshore at a water depth up to 3000 m. The basin produces an average of 77,000 barrels of petroleum per day and constitutes the third largest Brazilian petroleum producer (Lopes et al., 1999 and references therein). 2.2. Microbial enrichments 2.3. DNA extraction Community DNA was obtained from the aerobic and anaerobic microbial enrichments using the protocols described by Grobkopf et al. (1998) and Neria-Gonzáles et al. (2006) with modiﬁcations reported by Silva et al. (2010). 