The latter was challenged in an experimental study which predicted the formation of (σ-alkane)-NiF430 and (H)(alkyl)NiF430 complexes as intermediates (Scheller et al., 2010b). However, recent active site models of the MCR X-ray crystal structure (PDB code 1HBN) from Methanothermobacter thermautotrophicus support the theory that methane oxidation proceeds via a methyl radical and a CoM-S-NiIIF430 intermediate (Chen et al., 2012). Alternative AOM Mechanisms Under Sulfate-Reducing Conditions There has been tremendous debate regarding the interspecies intermediates of sulfate-dependent AOM, and several mechanisms have been proposed for consortia of ANME and SRB. One hypothesis proposes the formation of acetic acid and H2 from methane and water by methane-oxidizing archaea, with subsequent utilization of the acetic acid and H2 by SRB (Valentine and Reeburgh, 2000). Another variation of this process was previously proposed as “reverse acetoclastic methanogenesis” in which methane-oxidizing archaea produce acetate from CO2 and CH4, and the acetate is utilized by SRB (Zehnder and Brock, 1980; Hoehler et al., 1994). More recently, a “methylogenesis” mechanism was proposed, in which methanethiol (MeSH) serves as an interspecies compound that transfers methane-derived carbon from the methanotroph to the SRB (Moran et al., 2008). With respect to the latter, there is some evidence that methanethiol inhibits AOM (Moran et al., 2008; Meulepas et al., 2010) and sulfate reduction (Meulepas et al., 2010). Therefore, the role of methylsulfides is still unclear. Additionally, several studies have provided experimental evidence and theoretical predictions that compounds such as acetate, hydrogen, formate, methanol, and carbon monoxide are unlikely to serve as interspecies compounds based on their effects on sulfate reduction and AOM, their diffusion distances, and thermodynamic considerations (see Meulepas et al., 2010 and references therein). Finally, extracellular electron transfer between archaea and deltaproteobacteria via nanowires (Reguera et al., 2005; Gorby et al., 2006) or direct electron transfer via multi-heme c-type cytochromes (Meyerdierks et al., 2010) has also been proposed. These processes, however, would require the archaea and deltaproteobacteria to be in direct physical contact with each other. New Model for AOM Mechanism Under Sulfate-Reducing Conditions: Zero-Valent Sulfur as a Key Intermediate The studies focusing on the identification of AOM intermediates under sulfate-reducing conditions (see above) have mainly been predicated on the hypothesis that the ANME/SRB consortia catalyze AOM via an obligate syntrophic mechanism (for review see Knittel and Boetius, 2009). However, a new study of an enrichment culture obtained from sediments of the Mediterranean mud volcano Isis challenges that paradigm and also provides new insight to potential intermediates that may be transferred from the archaeal members to the SRB (Milucka et al., 2012). The culture consists of ANME-2 and bacteria belonging to the Desulfosarcina/Desulfococcus (DSS) cluster (Schreiber et al., 2010), and evidence suggests that the ANME-2 assimilate dissolved inorganic carbon (DIC) and catalyze both the anaerobic oxidation of methane and the reduction of sulfate to zero-valent sulfur (S0) and possibly to sulfide. Although experimental evidence is not yet available, the reduction of sulfate by ANME-2 is proposed to proceed via a non-canonical enzymatic pathway in which the electron donor may be the formylmethanofuran (MFR)/CO2 + MFR redox couple. The zero-valent sulfur can react with sulfide to form polysulfides, such as disulfide. The DSS then couple disproportionation of disulfide to sulfide and sulfate (Figure 1B) with autotrophic carbon assimilation. Presumably, the disproportionation reaction in DSS could be catalyzed by enzymes such as sulfate adenylyltransferase (SAT) and adenylylsulfate reductase (APR), which have been shown to be involved in the disproportionation of compounds such as elemental sulfur, thiosulfate, and sulfite (Krämer and Cypionka, 1989). The sulfate generated by the DSS can be partly reused by the ANME-2. Stoichiometrically, no net sulfate production occurs. Given these findings, it appears as though the ANME-2 are not necessarily dependent upon the sulfate-reducing partner and may be able to associate with any bacteria capable of scavenging disulfide and coupling it to energy generation and growth. This has important implications with respect to the biogeochemistry of methane oxidation and sulfur cycling as well as studies investigating interspecies compounds that are indicative of an obligate syntrophic AOM mechanism (see above). Nitrite-Dependent Anaerobic Methane Oxidation (“Intra-Aerobic Denitrification”) Anaerobic methane oxidation coupled to denitrification through “reverse methanogenesis” was first proposed for a consortium (“Twente”) enriched from Twentekanaal sediment (Netherlands) (Raghoebarsing et al., 2006). The culture consisted of a bacterium belonging to the candidate division, “NC10,” and archaea distantly related to Methanosaeta and ANME–II (Raghoebarsing et al., 2006; Ettwig et al., 2009). Subsequent investigations of the “Twente” culture showed AOM in the absence of the archaea (Ettwig et al., 2008, 2009), and further characterization of “Twente” and another culture (“Ooij”)(Ettwig et al., 2009) revealed microbial populations dominated by the denitrifying bacterium, ‘Candidatus Methylomirabilis oxyfera’ (Ettwig et al., 2010). Genome assembly obtained from metagenomic analyses shows that ‘Methylomirabilis oxyfera’ contains genes encoding enzymes for the complete pathway for aerobic methane oxidation, including a particulate monooxygenase (pMMO). The genome also contains several genes for denitrification, but lacks the genes encoding the enzymes for the reduction of nitrous oxide to dinitrogen (nosZDFY), an interesting finding given the observed production of N2 in the “Twente” and “Ooij” cultures during AOM (Raghoebarsing et al., 2006; Ettwig et al., 2008, 2009). ‘Methylomirabilis oxyfera’ also lacks genes encoding homologs of MCR or alkane-activating glycyl radical enzymes (Ettwig et al., 2010). Isotopic labeling experiments suggest that AOM by ‘Methylomirabilis oxyfera’ proceeds via reduction of nitrite to nitric oxide, followed by the conversion of two nitric oxide molecules to dinitrogen and molecular oxygen. 