in the anaerobic enrichment cultivated under thermophilic conditions and inoculated with crude oil derived from the Potiguar Basin reservoirs, which are known for their high organic acid content (Lopes et al., 1999). Finally, community analysis also showed the recovery of Rahnella-related species in the anaerobic enrichment. Although not commonly described in petroleum environments, these bacteria are reported as being involved in hydrocarbon biodegradation in Antarctic soil contaminated with polynuclear aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs; Ma et al., 2006). 3.4. Construction and screening of metagenomic clone library A fosmid metagenomic library was constructed using a mixture of the total DNA recovered from the aerobic and anaerobic enrichments, affording 31000 clones representing the bacterial diversity present in a biodegraded petroleum sample (GMR75, Potiguar Basin). Validation of this clone library by the digestion of six randomly selected clones using the restriction enzyme Not I revealed different band profiles, confirming the presence of different insertion events and the potential for the fosmid library to be representative of the bacterial diversity found in the enrichments. Based on strategies in the literature, a rapid colorimetric screening test was established for the detection of bacterial growth in hexadecane as sole carbon source (Johnsen et al., 2002; Bicalho et al., 2003). In this sense, 5000 clones were randomly chosen and screened using high throughput assays. Results revealed 72 positive hits detected by way of the development of a violet color resulting from the oxidation of MTT (Bicalho et al., 2003). The potential of these clones to use hexadecane as a sole carbon source was considered to be indicative of their degradation ability. 3.5. GC–MS analysis for detection of hexadecane biodegradation The biodegradation activity of the 72 clones considered to be positive hits from the high throughput screening was evaluated using GC–MS. These clones were first investigated in pools, and hexadecane was again used as the model compound. It is present in the aliphatic fraction of crude oil and is one of the major components of diesel (Chénier et al., 2003). As an n-alkane, it has been used as a model compound to study aliphatic hydrocarbon biodegradation by many authors (Berthe-Corti and Fetzner, 2002; Schoefs et al., 2004; Widdel et al., 2006). Among the eight pools evaluated (nine clones per pool), only one (CO8) showed biodegradation levels >50%. Three other pools did not show any biodegradation ability and the remaining four pools showed hexadecane biodegradation levels up to 28%. The CO8 pool was selected for biodegradation assays using GC–MS, and the clones were evaluated individually. GC–MS showed that five of the nine clones were able to degrade hexadecane by >70% after 21 days monitoring (Table 2; Fig. 4). It is important to note that the results refer to clones, which constitute a heterologous expression system in E. coli cells. In this sense, the extent of biodegradation observed can be considered excellent when compared to data in the literature on the biodegradation abilities of bacterial strains. Whyte et al. (1998) reported a Rhodococcus strain that showed a hexadecane biodegradation level of 6.1% after 102 days incubation. In another study, Ripley et al. (2000) developed systems for the immobilization of Pseudomonas and Acinetobacter cells and observed hexadecane biodegradation levels between 33% and 51%. An evaluation of the hexadecane biodegradation and emulsification abilities of a Pseudomonas aeruginosa strain under different experimental conditions revealed a biodegradation level of 11% after 3 days monitoring (Noordman et al., 2002). Furthermore, Vasconcellos et al. (2009) recently evaluated the biodegradation of different classes of petroleum biomarkers using aerobic strains isolated from the Campos Basin reservoir and found biodegradation levels <70% when only hydrocarbons were added as a carbon source. 