Effect of ethanol on the biodegradation of gasoline in an unsaturated tropical soil. Abstract Leaking underground storage tanks are a worldwide problem nowadays, therefore gasoline degradation and distribution in the subsurface have been widely studied. Brazil is the only country to currently use ethanol as fuel and as an oxygenate additive to gasoline, in amounts varying from 20 to 26% v/v. Consequently, both gasoline and ethanol may contaminate the environment when spills and leaks occur. Some authors suggest that despite the high degradability of gasoline, its degradation in the aquifer is hindered by the preferential biodegradation of ethanol, which would delay gasoline degradation; however, processes in the unsaturated zone are far less understood. The present study concentrates on degradation and distribution processes of ethanol-amended gasoline in tropical soil under unsaturated conditions. A multi-parametrical approach was adopted to assess the effects of ethanol on the fate of gasoline. Undisturbed natural soil was used to evaluate biodegradation processes while tank experiments determined differences in infiltration, distribution and retention of gasoline in unsaturated artificial porous medium. Physical, chemical and microbiological results suggest that ethanol enhances BTEX retention in soil, boosts microbial activity but delays BTEX biodegradation. The demand for alternative fuels and gasoline oxygenated additives has been increasing worldwide, driven mostly by the need to address growing problems linked to the availability and cost of fossil fuels and atmospheric pollution. Following the petroleum crisis in the 1970s, Brazil implemented a programme for the replacing of fossil fuel by renewable ethanol extracted from sugar-cane (Kheshgi et al., 2000 ;  Moreira and Goldemberg, 1999). The advantages and drawbacks of using ethanol as fuel and gasoline oxygenate have been largely investigated in several different aspects. These studies have been further stimulated by the implementation in 1990, in the USA, of the Clean Air Act, which requires the phasing out of MTBE as a fuel oxygenate by 2005 and its replacement by ethanol (Federal Register, 2000), because of MTBE's poor degradability and the foul taste and odour it gives to water (Dakhel et al., 2003 ;  EA, 1999). Areas of recent interest are, among others, the fate and distribution of ethanol and ethanol-blended gasoline in the environment, their degradability in different environmental compartments and conditions, as well as the effects the presence of ethanol could have on the movement and degradation of gasoline compounds (e.g. Adam et al., 2002; Corseuil et al., 1998; Lago, 2004 ;  Ruiz-Aguilar et al., 2002). Life cycle sustainability and energy balance, atmospheric benefits, ethanol and gasohol engine efficiency, all resulting from the use of gasoline oxygenates, and ethanol in particular, are undeniable (Jeuland et al., 2004 ;  Kheshgi et al., 2000); however, issues have come up concerning ground water contamination and the biodegradability of ethanol-amended gasoline in the environment. Ethanol's properties affect the infiltration, distribution, retention and final biodegradation of gasoline compounds (e.g. Adam et al., 2002 ;  McDowell and Powers, 2003; Reckhorn et al., 2001 ;  Ulrich, 1999). Because of its hydrophilicity, ethanol partitions almost immediately and completely into the aqueous phase, thus increasing the solubility of gasoline in water (the phenomenon of co-solvency), also reducing interfaces and surface tensions. Therefore, these processes alter the overall interactions and equilibrium between water, gasoline and soil particles. Laboratory experiments with inert soil have shown that, as ethanol-amended gasoline infiltrates into the vadose zone, ethanol is retained in soil residual water while benzene, toluene, ethyl-benzene and xylenes ( BTEX, the most problematic and persistent of gasoline compounds) progress and attain the saturated zone, creating an LNAPL pool in the capillary fringe; as ethanol-laden water eventually slowly drains into the capillary fringe, the scenario is similar to that of an ethanol spill over an LNAPL plume (McDowell and Powers, 2003). Plumes of ethanol-amended gasoline have been compared to standard gasoline plumes and found to be longer for benzene (B) and toluene (T) (Ruiz-Aguilar et al., 2002); this could be due to a delayed degradation of BTEX induced by the presence of ethanol, the preferential degradation of which would deplete soil of the necessary electron acceptors for BTEX degradation (Corseuil et al., 1998 ;  da Silva and Alvarez, 2002). However, most studies address the saturated zone, where oxygen may be available only in restricted amounts for an effective aerobic degradation of BTEX, and where water is present in important amounts. Also, experimental approaches often use inert or sandy soils, leaving relevant doubts about the effect of soil components and microbiota on the fate of gasoline and gasoline–ethanol mixtures. Processes involved in BTEX degradation in the vadose zone are still poorly understood, especially so where ethanol effects on BTEX degradation are concerned. The objectives of these studies were to elucidate some of those processes occurring during gasoline–ethanol leaks in the vadose zone of a tropical soil, focusing on the effects of ethanol on the biodegradation of gasoline compounds as well as the importance of soil components on the fate of contaminants. Previous studies were conducted with inert and sandy soils (McDowell and Powers, 2003 ;  Dakhel et al., 2003) and have not addressed the effects the presence of ethanol may have on the biodegradation of gasoline compounds in the unsaturated zone. Other studies have evaluated the fate of blended gasoline in the saturated zone (Corseuil et al., 1998), showing a delay in gasoline degradation because of the presence of ethanol. Furthermore, the influence of soil constituents on the fate of ethanol-blended gasoline are also unknown as most available data do not concern mechanisms occurring in natural soil, where the role of organic matter and microbial populations, for instance, are of crucial importance. 