The benzene degradation rate was on average twice as high in the sand-filled columns (up to 36 μM day−1) as compared with the lava-filled columns (up to 18 μM day−1) (Vogt et al., 2007). Here, we investigated the phylogenetic composition and dynamics of the benzene-degrading bacterial communities colonizing both fill materials, in order to elucidate the structure and function of these communities. Microorganisms colonizing the lava granules from the columns were analyzed whereas the sand particles from the columns were used as the inoculum for laboratory microcosms and subsequently analyzed by cloning and sequencing of 16S rRNA genes. After shifting the microcosms on other substrates representing potential intermediates, alterations of the community composition were analyzed by community fingerprinting. Our study aimed at identification of key organisms involved in anaerobic benzene degradation and elucidation of their possible interactions. Materials and methods Description of the field site The contaminated aquifer examined is located on the site of a former coal hydrogenation and benzene production plant near Zeitz (Saxony-Anhalt, Germany). The main contaminant is benzene, which reached the aquifer by several leakages and accidents during the operation of the plant between 1960 and 1990. Benzene concentrations are as high as 13 mM in the source zone. At the site, an upper and a lower aquifer are separated by a lignite and a clay layer. Both aquifers are heterogeneous and hydrogeologically connected due to discontinuities of the lignite–clay layer. The aquifer matrix is composed of river gravel and sand sediments, which contain more than 95% quartz. Both aquifers are anoxic, and sulfate is the main electron acceptor (Vieth et al., 2005). Natural attenuation (NA) processes proceeding in the upper aquifer have been investigated intensively during the past couple of years (Vieth et al., 2005; Fischer et al., 2006, 2007; Schirmer et al., 2006; Stelzer et al., 2006; Alfreider & Vogt, 2007). Gödeke et al. (2006) showed by means of a reactive tracer test that toluene is oxidized with sulfate as an electron acceptor in the lower aquifer downstream of the source zone. In order to investigate the anaerobic benzene bioremediation potential of the lower aquifer, two column systems consisting of four columns connected in series (25 cm diameter and 6 m length, each) were set up at an experimental plant in 2002, and continuously percolated with anoxic, sulfidic groundwater from the lower aquifer. One set of four columns was filled with sand and the other one with lava granules. The sand was taken from a nearby aerobic sand pit and sieved before use, resulting in a grain size between 2 and 3.15 mm. The lava is a volcanic rock from the Eifel under-saturated with silicon oxide. The percolating groundwater contains on average 300 μM benzene. Toluene, ethylbenzene and xylenes are present in trace amounts (≤1 μM). Furthermore, 4 mM sulfate, 300 μM sulfide, 120 μM ammonium, 5 μM orthophosphate, 150 μM potassium, 2.3 mM magnesium, 2.2 mM sodium and 6.1 mM calcium are present. A more detailed description of the column system was given by Vogt et al. (2007). Cultivation and sampling of the benzene-degrading consortium ZzBs1-4 Microcosms were set up in 240-mL serum bottles (Glasgerätebau Ochs GmbH, Bovenden, Germany) inside a glove box (Coy Laboratory Products Inc.) containing an atmosphere of 95% nitrogen and 5% hydrogen. Each bottle was filled with 110 mL of sand particles taken from the sand-filled columns of the in situ reactor and filled with anoxic mineral salt medium described elsewhere (Vogt et al., 2007) to a total volume of c. 235 mL. Benzene (0.3 mM), phenol (0.3 mM), toluene (0.3 mM) or benzoate (1 mM) was added as sources of carbon and energy from stock solutions prepared in anoxic demineralized water. For each substrate two replicates were set up. Furthermore, two controls were prepared without a substrate. 