14A Polyphasic microbial community analysis of petroleum hydrocarbon-contaminated soils from two northern Canadian communities Abstract The cold-adapted bacterial communities in petroleum hydrocarbon-contaminated and non-impacted soils from two northern Canadian environments, Kuujjuaq, Que., and Alert, Nunavut, were analyzed using a polyphasic approach. Denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis (DGGE) separation of 16S rDNA PCR fragments from soil total community DNA revealed a high level of bacterial diversity, as estimated by the total number of bands visualized. Dendrogram analysis clustered the sample sites on the basis of geographical location. Comparison of the overall microbial molecular diversity suggested that in the Kuujjuaq sites, contamination negatively impacted diversity whereas in the Alert samples, diversity was maintained or increased as compared to uncontaminated controls. Extraction and sequencing analysis of selected 16S rDNA bands demonstrated a range of similarity of 86–100% to reference organisms, with 63.6% of the bands representing high G+C Gram-positive organisms in the order Actinomycetales and 36.4% in the class Proteobacteria. Community level physiological profiles generated using Biolog GN plates were analyzed by cluster analysis. Based on substrate oxidation rates, the samples clustered into groups similar to those of the DGGE dendrograms, i.e. separation based upon geographic origin. The coinciding results reached using culture-independent and -dependent analyses reinforces the conclusion that geographical origin of the samples, rather than petroleum contamination level, was more important in determining species diversity within these cold-adapted bacterial communities. 1Introduction The expansion of human settlements to remote areas of the globe brings with it potential pollution problems. In the Canadian north, a large source of environmental contamination results from oil exploration and the spillage during transfer of petroleum hydrocarbons needed to generate heat and electricity. Temperature is one of the most important factors influencing the metabolic activity of microorganisms [1], directly affecting rates of degradation in polar regions. Several groups have observed that petroleum hydrocarbons can be biodegraded in cold environments [2–6], and that the application of oil to previously uncontaminated soil results in an increase in total bacterial numbers under near Arctic conditions [7,8], and cold climate regions of the southern hemisphere [9]. Estimates of microbial diversity within an environment can be divided into two broad categories, culture-dependent or -independent methods. Analysis of total community nucleic acids extracted from an environment using culture-independent methods permits the detection and phylogenetic identification of fastidious or as yet uncultured organisms. Denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis (DGGE) separation of 16S rDNA amplification products has been largely responsible for the description of many environments at the molecular level [10–12]. The total number of bands visualized in a DGGE gel also provides an estimate of the genetic diversity found within a given environment [10], and sequencing of selected DGGE bands enables phylogenetic relationships to be inferred [11,12]. The assignment of a metabolic capacity to a particular band from a DGGE gel, as inferred from phylogenetic analysis, has been postulated, although this remains to be demonstrated [13,14]. Culture-dependent techniques, such as Biolog-generated community level physiological profiles (CLPP) [15], have been used to estimate the ex situ metabolic potential of members of the microbial community from a variety of environments (see review by Konopka et al. [16]). CLPP provides an indication of the metabolic diversity present in an environment with respect to the number of defined substrates that can be oxidized [15]. Recent studies have suggested that the faster growing species, such as the pseudomonads, produce the generated patterns, and not the numerically dominant members of the microbial community [16,17]. The combination of culture-dependent and -independent approaches in the analysis of an environment may result in a more detailed description of the experimental system. Biolog analysis combined with either enterobacterial repetitive intergenic PCR [18] or DGGE separation of 16S rRNA amplification products [19] was used to monitor soil microbial community responses to different alfalfa strains and to the application of urea herbicides, respectively. In both studies, consistent differences between control and test systems were identified with the culture-dependent and -independent techniques. In this study, a similar approach combining culture-dependent and -independent techniques was used to evaluate the cold-adapted microbial population differences of soils impacted by petroleum hydrocarbons originating from two different communities in northern Canada. CLPP analysis of the soil microbial communities and DGGE analysis of 16S rDNA amplification products from total community DNA demonstrated that geographical separation between the two communities and differences in the location of sampling sites were more important than the petroleum hydrocarbon contamination levels in describing the microbial diversity. 2Materials and methods 2.1Soils A total of eight samples, four each from Kuujjuaq, Que. (58°06 N) and from Alert, Nunavut (82°30 N) were taken in July, 1997. 