Crude Oil Hydrocarbon Bioremediation and Soil Ecotoxicity Assessment In this study, we determined the limits and extent of hydrocarbon biodegradation, earthworm and plant toxicity, and waste leachability of crude oil-containing soils. Three oils (heavy, medium, and light of API gravity 14, 30, and 55, respectively) were mixed into silty loamy soils containing low (0.3%) or high (4.7%) organic carbon at 4000−27 000 mg/kg TPH. Hydrocarbon bioremediation in these artificially weathered oily soils usually followed first-order removal rates in which 50−75% and 10−90% of the total petroleum hydrocarbons (TPH) were degraded in 3−4 months for the low and high organic soils, respectively. Gas chromatographic profiles (simulated boiling point distillation of saturates and aromatic compounds) showed that, after bioremediation, hydrocarbons in oily soils decreased from 70 to 90%, from 40 to 60%, and from 35 to 60% for those carbon number species in the range of C11−C22, C23−C32, and C35−C44, respectively. Most oily soils were initially toxic to earthworms in which few animals survived 14-day bioassays. In a solid phase Microtox test, most oily soils had EC50 values that were ≤50%. Seed germination and plant growth (21-day test, wheat and oat but not corn) were also significantly reduced (0−25% of controls) in untreated soils containing the medium and light crude oils but not the heavy oil. Bioremediated soils were neither toxic to earthworms, inhibitory in the Microtox assay, nor inhibited seed germination after 5 (high organic soil) or 10−12 (low organic soil) months of treatment. Water-soluble hydrocarbons (e.g., O&G and BTEX) could leach from pretreated soils (medium and light crude oily soils) in column or batch extraction experiments. However, after bioremediation, most of the aromatic compounds were no longer leachable from the soils. These data demonstrate that treated oily soils lose their toxicity and potential to leach significant amounts of BTEX. These nontoxic soils contain 1000−8600 mg/kg residual hydrocarbons as TPH. Furthermore, these data suggest that the remaining petroleum compounds may be bound or unavailable in that they are not (a) biodegraded further, (b) toxic to soil-dwelling species (earthworms and plants), and (c) susceptible to leaching and subsequent impact to groundwater. These findings provide a basis for a framework in which petroleum hydrocarbon-containing soils can be evaluated by ecological assessment methods such as biodegradability, ecotoxicity, and leaching potential of regulated substances. Introduction Bioremediation is often a cost-effective method to treat oily soils and petroleum wastes containing biodegradable hydrocarbons and indigenous microbes. This soil cleanup technology has been successfully demonstrated in laboratory and field tests for refineries (1−6), in oil and gas operations in the treatment of oily sludges, and at pipeline sites to remediate accidental crude oil spills (7−9). The land treat ment process requires the management of appropriate levels (e.g., oil hydrocarbons as percentage total petroleum hydrocarbons, TPH) of applied waste to soil, aeration and mixing, nutrient fertilizer addition, pH amendment as required, and moisture control to optimize degradation by soil microorganisms. Guidance on the lab feasibility assessment, field implementation, and soil sampling strategies required to demonstrate land treatment of wastes have been developed by Huesemann (10, 11) and Sims et al. (12). A petroleum industry review based on such land treatment practices several years ago indicated that 70−90% of oily sludge hydrocarbons were removed from surface soils having loading rates of 10 000−50 000 mg/kg oil (1). Loehr et al. (13) studied the treatability of an oily sludge in field plots in a silty loam soil and demonstrated that 60−70% of the initial O&G (20 000−55 000 mg/kg) hydrocarbons were biodegraded within 2−3 years. There have been numerous studies and reviews in the literature documenting the ready degradability of crude oil hydrocarbons (alkanes, alkenes, aromatics, and polars) in soils, sludges, sediments, and the marine environment by naturally-occurring microbes. Experiments have shown that differences in the extent of soil hydrocarbon biodegradation may depend upon soil and crude oil types, concentration of total applied hydrocarbon, and nutrient growth stimulants (e.g., NH3 and PO43-) based on optimum C:N:P ratios (14−20). Research by Huesemann and Moore (21) on the influence of oil type on bioremediation in a sandy soil showed that a light-medium (API gravity 39 and high saturate fraction) crude oil biodegraded (O2 uptake and reduction in oil and grease) more extensively than a heavier crude (API gravity 21). In these experiments, optimum rates of O2 consumption and CO2 formation were observed in the first 3−4 months. There have been few definitive studies on identifying the fraction and types of petroleum hydrocarbons that are readily degraded or recalcitrant in oily waste soil treatment systems. Recently, Huesemann and Moore (22) showed that 93% of the saturate and 79% of the aromatic compounds having carbon numbers in the range of C10−C44+ were degraded in a sandy soil containing weathered Michigan (medium API gravity) crude oil with an initial concentration of 30 000 mg/kg TPH. In this same study, however, the polar fraction was resistant to microbial metabolism and did not degrade during the 5.5-month test. 