Bacterial communities in soil amended for many years with sewage sludge that contained heavy metals were assessed using rRNA approaches, including FISH and cloning and sequencing [23]. The study found that two sequence groups affiliated with the α-Proteobacteria and Actinobacteria were frequently obtained from clone libraries from the metal-contaminated soil, although most Actinobacteria sequences showed low similarity (<85%) to the sequences of any hitherto cultured actinomycete. The detoxification machineries that some of these organisms may have are considered useful for metal bioremediation, and comparisons with the machineries of previously isolated metal-resistant bacteria may yield interesting results. Recently, heavy-metal-tolerant Ralstonia eutropha was genetically engineered to express mouse metallothionein on the cell surface [26]. It was demonstrated that the inoculation of Cd2+-polluted soil with the genetically engineered Ralstonia significantly decreased the toxic effects of the heavy metal on the growth of tobacco plants. Waste treatment Microbial consortia involved in wastewater treatment have been a major subject of microbial ecology, and many papers have been published in which molecular tools were used for community analyses. Bacterial community structures and physiological states within an industrial phenol bioremediation system were recently analyzed [27•]. Comparisons made between the amounts of group-specific rRNAs and the process chemistry enabled the authors to identify some phylogenetic groups of bacteria important for the process performance. The phylogenetic diversity of bacterial communities supported by a seven-stage, full-scale bioreactor used to treat pharmaceutical wastewater was studied using PCR-based techniques (i.e. DGGE fingerprinting and cloning of 16S rDNA fragments [28]). These two techniques detected similar phylotypes, although they failed to concede on their relative distribution, suggesting difficulties in quantitative interpretation based on these methods. A combination of 16S rDNA cloning, hybridization with oligonucleotide probes for ammonia-oxidizing bacteria (AOB) and sequencing of the hybridization-positive clones suggested that novel Nitrosospira-like populations were the major AOB in a rhizosphere zone used to treat wastewater (rhizoremediation) [29]. To identify microbial populations responsible for phosphorus removal in activated-sludge, the structure of the bacterial population was analyzed by FISH during the operation of a laboratory-scale reactor with various phosphorus removal rates 30. ; 31.. FISH has also been used to analyze microbial populations in mesophilic and thermo-philic sludge granules [32], foaming activated-sludge [33] and bulking activated-sludge [34]. Temperature-gradient gel electrophoresis (TGGE) of PCR-amplified 16S rDNA fragments was used to identify the major phylotypes in phenol-digesting activated-sludge. Physiological characterization of isolated bacteria corresponding to these phylotypes identified microbial transition that caused a failure in the phenol treatment [35•]. The ecological information obtained in this study was successfully used to develop a countermeasure against the failure in the phenol treatment [36]. These papers present successful examples which showed the utility of molecular ecological approaches for manipulating microbial consortia for bioremediation. Bioaugmentation The introduction of exogenous microorganisms into environments (bioaugmentation) has been used in an attempt to accelerate bioremediation. It is desirable that the fate of an introduced organism be monitored in order to prove its contribution to pollutant degradation and to assess its influence on the ecosystem. Molecular tools have been used for this purpose. DGGE/TGGE fingerprinting of 16S rDNA fragments has been used to examine the effects of bioaugmentation on indigenous bacterial community structures in a range of situations: a laboratory-scale semicontinuous activated-sludge system loaded with 3-chloroaniline [37]; experimental model sewage plants subjected to shock loads of chlorinated and methylated phenols [38••]; and in 2,4-dichlorophenoxyacetic-acid-contaminated soil horizons [39]. Quantitative PCR assays targeting catabolic genes 40. ; 41. and gyrB (the gene coding for the subunit B protein of DNA gyrase) [42] have successfully been used to monitor the fates of introduced bacteria in complex microbial communities (e.g. those in activated-sludge and in soil). In some cases, where genetically modified organisms were utilized, bioaugmentation improved pollutant-biodegradation rates in the environment due to the establishment of transconjugants capable of degrading the pollutants rather than the direct contribution of the inoculated organisms 39. ; 43.. Conclusions Bioremediation is still considered to be a developing technology. One difficulty is that bioremediation is carried out in the natural environment, which contains diverse uncharacterized organisms. Most pollutant-degrading microorganisms isolated and characterized in the laboratory are now thought to make a minor contribution to bioremediation. Another difficulty is that no two environmental problems occur under completely identical conditions; for example, variations occur in the types and amounts of pollutants, climate conditions and hydrogeodynamics. 