Error bars (n = 4) indicate standard deviations. Hatched columns show average similarity between profiles observed at days 6, 13, 20, and 26 for each treatment. In this case, the mean values were obtained by averaging the pairwise similarities of the day 6 profile compared to the day 13 profile, the day 6 profile compared to the day 20 profile, the day 6 profile compared to the day 26 profile, the day 13 profile compared to the day 20 profile, the day 13 profile compared to the day 26 profile, and the day 20 profile compared to the day 26 profile. Error bars (n = 6) indicate standard deviations. These data indicate that most of the change in the DGGE profiles occurred between days 0 and 6, since the mean similarities for all pairwise comparisons from day 6 onward show little variation. Similarities (Dice coefficient) in DGGE profiles between different treatments at each time point. Shown are average similarities of profiles observed for oiled, nutrient-amended microcosms (0.25, 0.5, 1, 4, and 10% N) relative to the oiled, unamended control (○) and unoiled, nutrient-amended control (♦), respectively; average similarity between the different oiled, nutrient-amended microcosms (▪); and average similarity between DGGE profiles from replicate microcosms receiving the same nutrient amendment (0.75% N) (□). Error bars indicate standard deviations. To aid in visualization, symbols representing different comparisons have been slightly offset. For each time point, the average values were obtained from pairwise comparisons of DGGE profiles obtained for each treatment relative to the oiled, unamended control. Thus, the data for the day 6 time point, for example, represent the mean similarity obtained from five pairwise comparisons (the mean of the 0.25% N profile compared to the 0% N profile, the 0.5% N profile compared to the 0% N profile, the 1.0% N profile compared to the 0% N profile, the 4.0% N profile compared to the 0% N profile, and the 10% N profile compared to the 0% N profile). Similar comparisons were made between the fertilizer-only control and the other treatments. For microcosms that received oil and different nutrient amendments, all possible pairwise similarities were averaged to obtain the mean value. These data indicate that, at each time point other than day 0, the variation in DGGE profiles between replicate microcosms (□) is as great as the variation between different treatments (▪). The different nutrient treatments led to the development of clearly different microbial communities (Fig. 5). As expected, communities were highly similar at the start of the experiment (Fig. 6). The largest differences between treatments, as indicated by the lowest average similarities, were observed after 6 days (Fig. 6). The average similarity between the different treatments was low (0.58 to 0.71) and not significantly different from the similarity of each individual treatment relative to either the unfertilized, oiled control (0% N) or the unpolluted control (FO) (P > 0.05). This indicated that a unique microbial community was selected in each microcosm. However, three independent microcosms were prepared for one of the bioremediation treatments (0.75% N). The average similarity between the DGGE profiles of these three independently operated microcosms, which were subjected to the same nutrient treatment, was slightly higher than the average similarity between those of microcosms treated with different levels of inorganic nutrients (Fig. 6). However, statistical analysis showed that differences in community structure between the true replicate microcosms receiving the same nutrient treatment were not significantly different from the differences measured between the communities in microcosms receiving different nutrient treatments (P > 0.05). Phylogenetic analysis and diversity of bacterial communities.To obtain a more specific picture of which bacterial taxa were stimulated by the oil and bioremediation treatments, phylogenetic analysis of cloned 16S rRNA genes was performed. The microcosms and sampling times indicated in Table 1 were selected because DGGE analysis revealed the greatest differences in the predominant populations. Clone libraries were screened by ARDRA, and representatives of ARDRA profiles occurring more than once in a library were partially sequenced (Table 2). 