The distribution of ARDRA types present in different clone libraries was determined and used to calculate the Shannon-Weaver index {H = −Σ[ni  ·  log(ni)], where ni is the relative contribution of clone type i to the whole library}. ARDRA types occurring more than once in a library were selected for sequence analysis. Sequence data were obtained with a single primer (pD′, E. coli positions 534 to 518 [12]), generating 0.5 kb of sequence data. For a selection of clones, the nearly complete 16S rDNA was sequenced in both directions. Sequences were compared to sequences deposited in the GenBank DNA database by using the BLAST algorithm (1). Alignments were performed by using ClustalW and corrected manually. Distance analysis using the Jukes and Cantor correction (24) and bootstrap resampling (100 times) was done with the TREECON package (45), and the distance matrix was used to construct a tree via neighbor joining (35). Parsimony analysis was done by using DNAPARS from the PHYLIP package (14). Chemical data from microcosms. (A) amounts of nitrogen in residing seawater of beach microcosms over time. Symbols: ▵, 0% N; •, 1% N; ♦, 2% N; ▾, 4% N; ▪, 10% N. Arrows indicate addition of nutrients. (B) Daily carbon dioxide production, averaged over three independent runs, with bars indicating standard deviation, for microcosms. Symbols: ▵, FO; ▪, 0% N; •, 0.75% N. For the FO and 0% N microcosms, standard deviation symbols were often smaller than the data symbols. Arrows indicate addition of nutrients. (C) Cumulative carbon dioxide production in microcosms. The open portion of the column indicates production during the first 7 days; carbon dioxide production during the last 21 days of the experiment is shown by the hatched portion of the column. Standard deviations are shown by error bars for the microcosms prepared in triplicate (FO, 0% N, and 0.75% N). (D) Percentage of biodegradation of TPH (open), TRH (black), n11-to-n33 alkanes (hatched), and PAH (grey) per treatment. Error bars indicate standard deviations. The rate and extent of oil degradation were examined by measuring carbon dioxide production over time and the oil composition at the start and end of the experiment (28 days). In all oiled microcosms treated with inorganic nutrients, the rate of carbon dioxide production strongly increased relative to that of the control treated with oil only (0% N), directly after fertilization (Fig. 2B and C). After 28 days, the amount of carbon dioxide produced in the fertilized microcosms was significantly higher than that in the untreated 0% N microcosms (P < 0.001). Daily carbon dioxide production slowly declined over time, with nutrient amendments temporarily stimulating carbon dioxide production (Fig. 2B and data not shown). In general, the initial rate of carbon dioxide production appeared to increase with the amount of fertilizer added; only the 10% N treatment deviated strongly (Fig. 2C). A significant positive correlation (r = 0.74 to 0.96, P < 0.05) between the amount of nutrient added and daily carbon dioxide production, corrected for the background production in the 0% N microcosm, was observed only between days 2 and 7, when the 10% N microcosm was not considered. During the last 21 days, no correlation (r = −0.182, P > 0.05) was found between nutrient treatment and the total carbon dioxide produced in this period (Fig. 