Analysis of libraries and compilation of sequence data.To determine the microbial diversity associated with different redox zones in the contaminated aquifer at the former Wurtsmith Air Force Base, six rDNA clone libraries were prepared by PCR with bulk DNA extracted from aquifer samples and analyzed. Figure 1 shows a schematic diagram of the sampling location and the designations of clone libraries associated with the different sampling depths and proposed redox zones. Four libraries (two universal, one bacterial, and one archaeal) were prepared from the CH sample (methanogenic zone). One universal library was prepared from each of the S (sulfate-reducing–methanogenic zone) and Fe (iron- or sulfate-reducing zone) samples. One or two microtiter plates of clones (96 to 192 clones) were screened per library. A total of 812 clones containing rDNA inserts from the six libraries were screened by analysis of RFLP patterns. Approximately 50% of the clones screened by RFLP type (with the exception of the archaeal library; see below) were unique, indicating that the microbial communities associated with the three redox zones studied are complex. Representative clones of all RFLP types that occurred more than once in a given library, as well as representatives of some of the unique RFLP types, were fully sequenced. Only four chimeric sequences were identified; all were clones with unique RFLP types in the WCHA library and were excluded from subsequent analyses. Groups of two or more highly related sequences (≥98% identical) were considered to belong to the same sequence type, resulting in the identification of 104 putatively nonchimeric sequence types from the six clone libraries. Table 1 summarizes the distribution of sequence types by divisions (main lines of descent within domains) and percent abundance in each library. Several sequences (WCHA2-01, WCHB1-60, and WCHB1-77) have unusual secondary structural features, such as large insertions or deletions relative to most 16S rDNAs, usually associated with variable regions of the molecule. Sequence WCHA2-01 has a 47-base insertion between nucleotides 597 and 598 (Escherichia coli numbering), transforming what is a stem-loop structure at this location in most SSU rRNAs into a proposed cruciform structure. Comparative analyses.Comparative analyses of the Wurtsmith aquifer sequences to known 16S rDNA sequences revealed a broad spectrum of bacterial and, to a lesser extent, archaeal diversity (Table 1). Of the 104 sequence types identified, 94 were bacterial and 10 were archaeal. No eucaryal rDNAs were identified in any of the libraries. Primers specific for Bacteria andArchaea amplified rDNAs belonging to their respective domains, with the exception of bacterial clone WCHD3-88, which exhibited mispriming of the forward primer specific forArchaea around nucleotide 140 (E. colinumbering). Of the 104 sequence types, 42 were ≥90% identical to rDNA sequences available in GenBank as of March 1998 (only 7 of these were ≥97% identical). Of the 104 sequence types, 62 were <90% identical to known rDNA sequences. Figure 2 is an evolutionary distance tree of the bacterial domain showing the distribution of the 94 Wurtsmith bacterial sequence types among bacterial divisions, a rough description of the bacterial biodiversity at this site. The Wurtsmith sequences fell into 20 of the 35 to 40 known main phylogenetic divisions (16). The majority (63 of 94) of the bacterial sequence types were phylogenetically associated with 10 of the well-recognized divisions. Twenty-one of the novel bacterial sequence types were affiliated with four recently described candidate divisions that have no cultivated representatives (OP divisions; see Discussion). A candidate division is a monophyletic group of rDNA sequences with no specific association with known divisions. Ten of the 94 bacterial sequence types had no specific association with any of the known divisions or candidate divisions and were phylogenetically divided among six novel division level groups (candidate divisions WS1 to WS6). No consistent branching order of divisions in the tree shown in Fig. 2 could be established by bootstrap resampling, with the exception of the basal placement of the Aquificales division and the distant but specific relationships of the Chlamydiadivision to the Verrucomicrobia division and the green sulfur bacteria division to the Cytophagales division. Figure 3 shows seven dendograms that comprise subsections of Fig. 2, expanded with more reference sequences. 