Sodium acetate was added to 0.3 M, and nucleic acids were precipitated from the solution by the addition of 1 volume of isopropanol. Community nucleic acids were purified by passage through a ChromaSpin+TE-1000 column (Clontech Laboratories, Inc.). PCR and cloning.Community rDNAs were PCR amplified from 1 to 50 ng of bulk DNA in reaction mixtures containing (as final concentrations) 1× PCR buffer II (Perkin Elmer), 2.5 mM MgCl2, a 200 μM concentration of each deoxynucleoside triphosphate, a 300 nM concentration of each forward and reverse primer, and 0.025 U of AmpliTaq Gold (Perkin Elmer) per μl. Reaction mixtures were incubated in a model PT-100 thermal cycler (MJ Research Inc.) at 94°C for 12 min (for initial denaturation and activation of AmpliTaq Gold), followed by 30 cycles at 94°C for 1 min, 50°C for 45 s, and 72°C for 2 min and then by a final extension period of 12 min at 72°C. Six clone libraries were prepared (Fig. 1). For all clone libraries, rDNAs were amplified with universal reverse oligonucleotide primer 1492R (5′-GGT TAC CTT GTT ACG ACT T-3′). The universal forward oligonucleotide primer for clone libraries WCHA, WsCH, WSA, and WFeA was 533F (5′-GTG CCA GCM GCC GCG GTA A-3′). For clone library WCHB, the forward primer was 27F (specific forBacteria) (5′-AGA GTT TGA TCC TGG CTC AG-3′) (21). For clone library WCHD, the forward primer was 25F (specific for Archaea) (5′-CYG GTT GAT CCT GCC RG-3′). PCR products were separated on a 0.7% agarose gel, excised, purified with an UltraClean kit (MoBio Laboratories, Inc.), and eluted in 10 mM Tris (pH 8.0). The purified PCR products were cloned with an Original TA Cloning Kit or a TOPO TA Cloning Kit in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions (Invitrogen Corp.). Plasmid DNAs containing inserts were prepared for restriction fragment length polymorphism (RFLP) analysis and sequencing (see below) by use of a 96-well alkaline lysis procedure modified (18) from that of Ng et al. (27). Screening of rDNA clones by RFLP.rDNA inserts from recombinant clones were reamplified by PCR with reaction mixtures containing (as final concentrations) 1× Pfu reaction buffer (Stratagene), 2.5 mM MgSO4, a 100 μM concentration of each deoxynucleoside triphosphate, a 150 nM concentration of each vector-specific forward and reverse primer, ca. 0.01 U ofPfu DNA polymerase per μl, and 50 to 400 pg of purified plasmid per μl as a template. The cycle profile was the same as that for the initial amplification of the rDNA (see above). Aliquots (25 μl) of crude reamplified rDNA PCR products were digested with 1.5 U of each of the 4-base-specific restriction endonucleasesHinPII and MspI in 1× NEB buffer 2 (New England Biolabs)–0.01% Triton X-100 in a final volume of 30 μl for 3 h at 37°C. Digested fragments were separated by agarose (2% MetaPhor; FMC BioProducts) gel electrophoresis and visualized by staining with ethidium bromide and UV illumination. RFLP patterns for each library were grouped visually, and representatives were selected (see Results) for sequencing. Sequencing of rDNA clones.Plasmid templates from representative clones were sequenced with an ABI 373 Stretch DNA sequencer (Dye-Terminator Cycle Sequencing Ready Reaction FS Kit; PE Applied Biosystems) in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions. Primers used for sequencing included vector primers and small-subunit (SSU) rDNA primers: 533F (see above), 356F (5′-ACT CCT ACG GGA GGC AGC A-3′), 907R (5′-CCG TCA ATT CCT TTR AGT TT-3′), and 1220R (5′-GTA GCR CGT GTG TMG CCC-3′). Phylogenetic analyses and chimera detection.Sequences were compared to available databases by use of the BLAST (Basic Local Alignment Search Tool) network service (1) to determine their approximate phylogenetic affiliations. Partial sequences were compiled in Sequence Navigator (PE Applied Biosystems); compiled sequences were aligned by use of the ARB database (40). Chimeric sequences were identified by use of the CHECK_CHIMERA program (25), by secondary-structure anomalies, and by branching-order discrepancies of independently inferred regions of the alignment as previously described (18). Sequence alignments used for phylogenetic inference were minimized by use of the Lane mask (22) for bacterial data sets (1,241 positions were used) or an archaeal mask designed by use of the ARB database (1,250 positions were used). All presented dendrograms were constructed by use of the ARB database with evolutionary distance (neighbor-joining algorithms with Olsen correction). The robustness of inferred topologies was tested by bootstrap resampling of trees calculated with evolutionary distance (test version 4.0d61 of PAUP*, written by David L. Swofford; neighbor-joining algorithm with either Kimura two-parameter correction or maximum-likelihood correction with an empirically determined gamma distribution model of site-to-site rate variation and empirically determined base frequencies), parsimony (test version 4.0d61 of PAUP*; heuristic search), and maximum likelihood (fastDNAml) (25). The data set used for the analysis is available athttp://crab2.berkeley.edu/pacelab/179.htm. 