A much recent way to form molecular oxygen as a metabolite intermediate is the dismutation of nitric oxide (NO) during nitrite reduction (NO2−) in the methane-utilizing enrichment culture (Ettwig et al. 2010). Nitric oxide is an intermediate of the well known microbial nitrate reduction (NO3− → NO2− → NO → N2O → N2); however, in the methane-utilizing enrichment culture described by Ettwig et al. (2010), the sequential reduction of nitrite appear to proceed otherwise. Experimental evidences indicated that ‘Candidatus Methylomirabilis oxyfera’ (the dominant bacterium in the methane-utilizing enrichment culture) reduces nitrite (NO2−) to nitric oxide (2NO), after which nitric oxide undergoes a dismutation reaction to yield nitrogen (N2) and molecular oxygen (O2). The oxygen generated is subsequently used to oxidize the methane substrate to methanol. This nitrite-linked oxidation of methane resembles, in principle, anaerobic oxidation of alkane via chlorate reduction. Therefore, it is possible, even likely that other denitrifiers’ organisms with similar physiological features may be able to couple the oxidation of alkanes with various chain lengths to the reduction of nitrite via nitric oxide dismutation ( Ettwig et al., 2010 ; Zedelius et al., 2010). 7. Biochemical strategies for the anaerobic metabolism of alkanes The initial activation of alkanes is critical for their anaerobic biodegradation. During the past decade numerous studies have been undertaken to elucidate the activation mechanisms of alkanes under anoxic conditions. Indeed, anaerobic microorganisms have developed unprecedented biochemical strategies to overcome the chemically inert nature of alkanes (Heider 2007). These strategies involved in the initial attack of alkanes include activation by addition of fumarate to alkane, carboxylation with inorganic carbon and other additional possible alternative mechanisms (Fig. 3). 7.1. Alkane activation by addition to fumarate Increasing evidence indicates that addition to fumarate play a dominant role in the activation of alkanes for further degradation under anoxic conditions (Table 2 ; Table 3). So and Young, 1999a ; So and Young, 1999b provided some evidence linking the growth of a sulfate reducing isolate D. alkenivorans strain AK-01 to anaerobic oxidation of n-pentadecane and n-hexadecane using labeling experiments. Metabolites analysis indicated that C-even and C-odd cellular fatty acids were formed from C-even and C-odd n-alkanes in strain AK-01. Similar cellular fatty acids pattern has also been observed in strain Pnd3 ( Aeckersberg et al. 1998) and Desulfatibacillum aliphaticivorans CV2803T (Cravo-Laureau et al. 2005). In addition, strain AK-01 and strain CV2803T also produce 2-, 4-, 6- and 8-methyl branched fatty acids as well as (1-methylalkyl)succinates with chain lengths that specifically correlated with those of the parent substrates, thus indicating that n-alkanes are anaerobically activated by addition to fumarate at the sub-terminal carbon atom ( Cravo-Laureau et al., 2005 ; Callaghan et al., 2006). A similar reaction has been reported for the nitrate-reducing strain HxN1 grown on labeled n-hexane with details about the first proposed pathway for anaerobic degradation of a straight-chain alkane ( Rabus et al. 2001; Wilkes et al., 2003 ; Widdel et al., 2006). Briefly, addition of fumarate to n-alkane is catalyzed by a radical enzyme (the extracted hydrogen from the parent substrate is recovered) to yield (1-methylalkyl)succinate ( Fig. 3A), after which the activation metabolite undergoes a carbon skeleton rearrangement (presumably as coenzyme A thioester) to form (2-methylalkyl)malonyl-CoA that allows decarboxylation to 4-methylalkanoyl-CoA. The resulting fatty acid can then undergo a “conventional” β-oxidation to yield intermediates such as (2-methylalkyl)-CoA, a linear fatty acid containing two carbon atoms less than the parent n-alkane, propionyl-CoA and acetyl-CoA. Acetyl-CoA is further oxidized to carbon dioxide (CO2). Fumarate can be regenerated from propionyl-CoA (via methylmalonyl-CoA and succinyl-CoA) or alternatively from acetyl-CoA ( Rabus et al. 