No studies have been reported on the degradation of alkanes under iron-reducing conditions so far. For biodegradation of aromatic hydrocarbons, current information is available in reviews by Chakraborty and Coates, 2004 ; Foght, 2008 and references therein. Given the scope of the current review, a brief overview of the anaerobic metabolism of alkanes is provided, with emphasize on the predominant role of glycyl radical enzyme-dependent fumarate addition which results in the formation of methyl branched alkylsuccinates. 2. Anaerobic degradation of alkanes Alkanes that have been shown to be biodegradable under anoxic conditions can be classified into linear (general formula CnH2n+2), branched (general formula CnH2n+2, n > 3) and cyclic (general formula CnH2n, n > 2). From a thermodynamic point of view, anaerobic biodegradation of alkanes with various electron acceptors is feasible (see Table 1 with hexadecane as a model substrate). Biodegradation of alkanes by specific groups of microorganisms is discussed below. Anaerobic degradation of hydrocarbons under nitrate-reducing conditions has been regarded as an effective strategy for bioremediation of crude oil, fuel-contaminated aquifers and underground storage tanks (Rabus and Widdel 1996). The use of nitrate for in situ remediation of these contaminated environments has been driven not only by the favorable energetics of nitrate reduction but also by high water solubility and mobility of nitrate (92.1 g/100 ml water at 25 °C). Crude oil and its refined products constitute the major sources of alkanes in the environment (Ehrenreich et al. 2000). Due to their very low solubility in water, long-chain alkanes (>C12) are generally not considered as toxic. However, at high concentrations, relatively short-chain alkanes (C5–C12) and cyclic alkanes have negative effects on biological membranes ( Gill and Ratledge, 1972; Sikkema et al., 1994 ; Sikkema et al., 1995). The fate of alkanes and the effectiveness of bioremediation strategies under such conditions require a better knowledge of the biochemical capacities of nitrate-reducing microorganisms. Anaerobic oxidation of hydrocarbons coupled to the reduction of nitrate was first demonstrated with pure isolates (strains ToN1, mXyN1, EbN1, and PbN1) for utilization of alkylbenzenes in crude oil (Rabus and Widdel 1996). Furthermore, a nitrate-reducing enrichment culture incubated with crude oil did not show any degradation of alkanes (C5 to C12) until alkylbenzenes (C1 to C3) were completely depleted. This indicated that the enrichment culture exhibited biphasic growth, in which alkanes were only partially consumed, and among them, n-hexane appeared to be the preferred substrate. Cell hybridization further revealed that the majority of the enriched denitrifiers affiliated with the β-subclass of the Proteobacteria ( Rabus et al. 1999). Ecological distribution of anaerobic hydrocarbons degrading denitrifiers is not restricted to hydrocarbon-contaminated habitats since they have been commonly isolated from non-contaminated environments (Fries et al., 1994; Song et al., 1999 ; Zwolinski et al., 2000). The currently known pure isolates of alkane-degrading nitrate respiring bacteria (NRB) are affiliated with the β- and γ-subclass of the Proteobacteria. At least six axenic cultures of alkane-degrading NRB have been documented so far ( Fig. 1 and Table 2). Strains OcN1 and HxN1were isolated with n-octane and n-hexane, respectively, from enrichment cultures prepared from ditch sediments. The two isolates are members of the family Rhodocyclaceae within the β-Proteobacteria ( Ehrenreich et al. 2000). These strains are able to grow for complete oxidation of C6–C12n-alkanes to CO2 with transitory production of nitrite observed during the growth of strain HxN1 (Ehrenreich et al. 2000). When grown anaerobically with crude oil, strain HxN1 has been shown to co-metabolize short-chain (C4–C5) and cyclic alkanes (cyclopentane and methylcyclo-pentane) in addition to the utilization of C6 to C8n-alkanes as substrates ( Wilkes et al. 