Data (total PLFAs, respiration, TPH) were analysed for statistically significant differences using two-way ANOVA in randomized blocks, considering sample date and soil type as treatments, and experimental replication as blocking structure. Principal components analysis (PCA) was carried out for both PLFA and Biolog profiles on normalized data, i.e. data expressed as a percentage of the average value of the set. Further details of manipulation of data from sole carbon source utilization tests prior to PCA are given above. Diesel was readily degraded in all three soils, with around 60% having been removed by day 103 (Fig. 1). Biodegradation and abiotic losses were not discriminated. There were no significant differences in the total amount of diesel removed by the end of the experiment, but the initial rate of loss in the Boyndie soil (BY) was slower than for the other two soil types. Changes in microbial parameters confirmed that biodegradation was taking place. Respiration increased after addition of diesel for all three soils (Fig. 2). Maximum respiration for both Insch (IN) and Countesswells (CW) diesel-contaminated soil had occurred by day 27, and had decreased to control or near-control levels by the end of the experiment. The maximum respiration for BY was observed on day 62, and was still significantly elevated over control levels by the end of the experiment. All three uncontaminated soils had an elevated rate of respiration at day 1 compared with the rest of the experiment, possibly because of the disturbance involved in mixing the soils and placing them into the microcosms. Microbial biomass (as measured by total PLFA concentrations; Fig. 3) was also stimulated by diesel addition. IN and CW diesel-contaminated soil reached a maximum of biomass by day 27, at which point the levels were significantly elevated over the equivalent control soil. After day 27, the biomass decreased in the diesel-contaminated soils, and for IN was below the control biomass by the conclusion of the experiment. Microbial biomass was also stimulated in BY soil by the addition of diesel, and reached its maximum value by day 103. BY had a lower biomass than for IN and CW, both at the start and for the entire duration of the experiment; concentrations were significantly lower than for IN and CW at all times for both control and diesel-contaminated soils. Trends in the soil pH were also affected by diesel contamination. For IN and BY, the pH in the diesel-contaminated soils remained at a constant level, but the pH in the control soils showed a significant decrease of 0·8–1·0 pH units during the course of the experiment (Fig. 4). CW did not show the same pattern. A green colour appeared after a short time in wells containing 2,3-dihydroxynaphthalene; it was presumed that this was caused by an abiotic reaction, and the results from these wells were not included in further multivariate analysis. All straight-chain carboxylic acids caused colour development for all of the samples, and none of the aromatic or cyclic carboxylic acids did so. The carbon sources added to the MT plates, when analysed in combination with the GN data (i.e. as a dataset of 115 carbon sources), did not improve the discrimination in multivariate space of the different samples when compared with the discrimination given by the GN data alone (results not shown). Analysis of the MT data alone showed no, or only poor discrimination between samples. 