Atlas et al. (1991) found that petrol contamination increased the ability of a microbial community to utilize a range of substrates but decreased the overall bacterial diversity. They concluded that hydrocarbon contamination selected for a reduced number of generalist, catabolically-versatile species. Lindstrom et al. (1999) studied the effects of long-term oil contamination in an Arctic soil; they inoculated Biolog plates at a range of serial dilutions, and found that increasing dilution reduced the number of substrates utilized by control soils to a much greater extent than for oil-affected soils. They similarly concluded that this showed that oil contamination selected for a less diverse, but catabolically-versatile bacterial community. Juck et al. (2000) found that, at two oil-contaminated Arctic sites investigated by DGGE and Biolog analysis, absolute diversity was decreased at one site and remained the same or increased at the other. Thus, it seems likely, on the basis of comparison with previous findings, that the absolute diversity in each one of the different soil types tested in this study would have been decreased as a result of diesel contamination. What this study demonstrates is that oil contamination and bioremediation does not lead to increasing similarity of different soil types; it seems likely that each diesel-contaminated soil converged on a different generalist bacterial community. The results obtained from the Biolog CLPPs are dependent on culturing of bacteria (Garland and Mills 1991) and therefore, subject to biases (Haack et al. 1995; Konopka et al. 1998). This does not necessarily mean that CLPPs are meaningless for the study of soil microbial ecology, but it does require that they be interpreted with care and, ideally, compared with a non-culture-based technique (Garland 1997). Extraction and analysis of PLFAs is one such technique. PLFA profiles: community response to oil pollution The effect of diesel addition on soil community PLFA profiles is clear (Fig. 7). Diesel treatment is the major source of variation within the dataset, with much more of an effect than either incubation time or soil type. The PCA of individual date PLFA data confirms this (Fig. 8); soil types are separated on day 1, but only on a combination of PCs 3 and 4. For all the remaining time points, diesel treatment has a greater effect than soil type. The PLFA profiles confirm the information obtained from the Biolog CLPPs about the relative similarity of the soil types and the effect of diesel addition. Diesel treatment increases the disparity in community structure of the different soil types as measured by PLFA profiles. It can be seen particularly clearly for the day 27 data (8Fig. 8b), when biodegradative activity was at a maximum (as shown by diesel removal, respiration and biomass levels), that the three soil types are completely separated along PC 2 for the contaminated soils, yet the control soils form a single group. This pattern is also continued for the day 63 results. Individual PLFAs affected by diesel addition The specific PLFAs that change between samples in PLFA profiling for microbial ecology are often interpreted to give some idea as to which taxonomic groups are changing, and also the nutritional status of the microbiota. However, in general, this is not valuable for studies of oil bioremediation as usually, all that can be deduced is that oil contamination leads to a relative increase in the proportion of Gram-negative bacteria within the community (Venosa et al. 2000). 