The contamination of soil and aquifer systems by gasoline hydrocarbons as a consequence of accidental spillage can cause serious environmental problems. The major gasoline constituents (benzene, toluene and xylene - BTX) are relatively soluble in water and are considered human carcinogens. Thus, the level of BTX in water must be highly controlled and limited to low values (6,16). Several methods can be employed to remove gasoline from soil and groundwater including air-sparging, soil vapour extraction, "pump and treat" and bioremediation. There is no general rule to choose the best treatment for contaminated sites. Each case must be analyzed individually, evaluating its particularities. Physical treatments separate soil and contaminants without destroying or chemically modifying them but have many limitations, such as high cost (10). A great amount of hydrocarbons becomes sorbed in soil matrix (approximately 50%) decreasing the removal efficiency (7). Biological process, on the other hand, is a promising technology for clean-up these contaminants mainly due to its simplicity and cost-effectiveness as compared to the other alternatives (2). Bioremediation can be considered as a new technology to treat contaminated sites by the use of biological agents able to modify or decompose target pollutants. It can use the action or/and addition of indigenous microorganisms, exogenous microorganisms from other sites, or genetically modified organisms (13). The maximum benefit of this process is the mineralization of the pollutant, leading ultimately to the formation of CO2, H2O and biomass (15). In biological treatments it is necessary to perform laboratory feasibility tests to determine the microbial potential to degrade the pollutants and whether nutrients are required to increase the degradation rate (3). The objective of this work was to evaluate the biodegradation of gasoline in several treatment systems constituted of unsterilized soil inoculated or not with different bacterial cultures. The gasoline used in all experiments was obtained from PETROBRÁS (Petróleo Brasileiro S. A) gas station (Rio de Janeiro, Brazil). Brazilian gasoline contains 22% of ethanol and its characteristics, under the described test conditions, were preserved and confirmed by regular chromatographic analysis. The soil was obtained from a site free of gasoline contamination in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. Soil samples were collected from different sites to a depth of 30 cm by hand digging. The amount of soil was sufficient to store for a maximum period of a month because more than 30 days are generally unsuitable for use in biodegradation studies (12). The soil was mixed thoroughly, sieved through screens with 2 mm diameter openings to remove stones, rot materials and other debris and stored in a sterile polyethylene flask (2-liter capacity) at 10oC in order to reduce moisture losses (12). The water holding capacity was evaluated as suggested by Watwood and White. (18). Table 1 summarizes the soil characteristics performed by CNPS (Centro de Pesquisas de Solos)/ EMBRAPA (Empresa Brasileira de Pesquisa Agropecuária). The bacterial cultures utilized in this study were Pseudomonas putida (ATCC 12633), obtained from culture collection, and three species, isolated from soil in the presence of gasoline, identified as Burkholderia cepacia, Pseudomonas alcaligenes and Klebsiella pneumoniae. All microorganisms were maintained on 10 ml slopes of nutrient agar (storage culture) at 4oC and regularly subcultured and monitored for purity. Before introduction into the microcosms, the inoculum was prepared using bacterial cells transferred from the storage culture to a test tube containing 10 ml of nutrient broth. After incubation at 30oC for 14 h, the inoculum was propagated to a 500 ml flask containing 100 ml of the same medium, and also incubated with shaking (150 rpm) to mid-log phase at 30oC. According to dry weight curve plotted for all species, the inoculum volume was calculated to obtain approximately 106 cells per gram of soil. All bacterial cells used were grown separately. 