The bacterial isolates (130) were tested for their ability to grow in mineral salts medium (MSM) with crude oil as carbon source. Out of 130 isolates, 50.8%, 24.6%, 20.8% and 3.8% showed low, moderate, high, and excellent growth respectively (Table 2). Micrococcus sp. GS2-22, Corynebacterium sp. GS5-66, Flavobacterium sp. DS5-73, Bacillus sp. DS6-86, and Pseudomonas sp. DS10-129, all had excellent growth. Bacteria, actinomycetes and fungal populations were high in samples GS-5 and DS-9, where higher quantities of oil contents were noticed. Similarly large population of bacteria, actinomycetes and fungi were recorded from oil-spilled environment (Venkateswaran et al. 1993; Wrenn and Venosa 1996; Cabello 1997). Population levels of hydrocarbon utilisers and their population within the microbial community appear to be a sensitive index of environmental exposure to hydrocarbons. In unpolluted ecosystem, hydrocarbon utilisers generally constitute less than 0.1% of the microbial community and in oil polluted ecosystems they can constitute upto 100% of the viable microorganisms. The microbial populations quantitatively reflect the degree or extent of exposure of that ecosystem to hydrocarbon contamination (Atlas 1981; Al-gounaim et al. 1995). In general, gasoline and diesel station soil samples contained Corynebacterium species at higher proportion. The dominance of the genus Corynebacterium revealed that it might have developed the ability to acclimatize to the oil environment. We observed bacteria belonged to diversified groups, which may be due to the oil enrichment. The changes in the dynamic equilibrium state of soil or aquatic environment leads to a corresponding change in microbial population and composition. The added oil enriched for the species that have inherent petroleum hydrocarbon assimilating potential (Bossert and Bartha 1984), whereas the less adapted species among the total heterotrophic population are gradually eliminated, resulting in qualitative shifts in species composition (Amadi 1990). The biochemical characteristics of the bacteria varied. Austin et al. (1977) reported that the biochemical reactions of the petroleum degraders, as a whole, were not uniform and no pattern of relatedness were discernible based on the reactions. In oil-spilled soil, lipolytic forms were present in high numbers, which may be due to richness of lipid source available in the area. Walker et al. (1975) also found an increase in absolute numbers of proteolytic bacteria, as well as lipolytic, chitinolytic and cellulolytic bacteria in oil contaminated subestuary of Chesapeake Bay. Microorganisms are known to attack specific compounds present in crude oil that is a complex mixture of saturates, aromatics and polar compounds (Bharathi and Vasudevan 2001). An effective degradation of crude oil would require simultaneous action of several metabolically versatile microorganisms with faourable environmental conditions such as pH, temperature and availability of nutrients (Venkateswaran and Harayama 1995). An oil spill in the environment leads to an adaptive process and if metabolically active hydrocarbon utilising microorganisms could be added quickly, the long period before the indigenous population could respond would be reduced considerably. 