3, cluster IV), in which only three enrichments obtained at intermediate times (Fig. 3, enrichments C3-4, U1-6, and U3-6) were present and from which only one late community (enrichment C1-15) was missing. These late communities were preceded by those in clusters II and III (Fig. 3), which represented compositions dominated by Pseudomonas syringaestrain Q5 (standard 25) and by Rhodococcus globerulusstrain Q6 (standard 26). The latter organism was not identified as a major community component in any of the enrichments obtained from contaminated soil sample C3. Taken together, the data indicate that there was a succession of organisms in the enrichment rather than continuous enrichment for a few strains. Key organisms in this succession were Pseudomonas syringae strain LQ20 (standard 11) at 2 to 4 weeks, Pseudomonas syringae strain Q5 (standard 25) at 6 to 8 weeks, Rhodococcus globerulus strain Q6 at 11 to 13 weeks, and Alcaligenes sp. strains B4 and N1 at 15 to 17 weeks. Degradation of C5+ by microbial enrichments and consortia.Aerobic C5+ degradation by six enrichments and three synthetic consortia was monitored. Synthetic consortia SC-5 and SC-9 consisted of isolates that appeared frequently as major community components, whereas synthetic consortium SC-41 consisted of all 41 standards that readily grew aerobically on rich medium. Sufficient oxygen for complete mineralization of the C5+ added was present in each of the serum bottles. Typical results for degradation of C5+ hydrocarbons by one of the enrichments and one of the synthetic consortia are shown in Fig.4. DCPD was not removed from any of the cultures; all the other compounds were partially or completely removed during incubation. DCPD was therefore used as an internal standard. Analysis of the rates of removal of individual hydrocarbons from the C5+ mixture by the method of Tchobanoglous (18) showed that most compounds obeyed first-order kinetics better than they obeyed zero-order kinetics. Lag times and first-order rate constants for the degradation kinetics of all C5+ components except DCPD are listed in Table 2. Benzene was degraded almost immediately by all enrichments except the enrichment obtained from soil C3; toluene degradation began immediately with enrichments U1, U3, and C2. Degradation of the other C5+ components began within 1 day of addition of the C5+ mixture to the cultures. Only enrichments U2 and U3 showed lag times greater than 1 day for m-xylene (enrichment U2) and m-xylene plus naphthalene (enrichment U3). The synthetic consortia all started degradation of C5+ compounds within 1 day after C5+ was added (Table 2). The rate constants for degradation of benzene, toluene, styrene, and naphthalene were on average greater for enrichments from contaminated soils than for enrichments from uncontaminated soils (Table 2). Degradation of m-xylene was the only exception, because enrichments U2 and U3 had substantially higher degradation rate constants (2.3 and 2.4 days−1, respectively) than most of the enrichments from contaminated soils. The rate constants obtained for the synthetic consortia were similar to those obtained for the enrichment cultures (Table 2). Averaging all the rate constants for enrichments yielded values of 2.67, 1.91, 1.59, 1.61, and 0.90 days−1 for benzene, toluene, xylene, styrene, and naphthalene, respectively. For the synthetic consortia the corresponding average rate constants were 3.51, 1.92, 0.65, 2.43, and 1.53 days−1, respectively. In all cases except enrichment C2, benzene degradation proceeded most rapidly (Table 2). The order of degradation of the various C5+ components for each culture is also shown in Table 2. This order was a function of both the rate constant and the lag time and was based on the average results for two cultures for each of the enrichments and six cultures for each artificial consortium. By adding all the average rank orders, the overall order of degradation of all of the C5+ components was established as benzene-styrene-toluene-naphthalene-xylene. 