2) during 21-day incubations. DGGE analysis was not conducted for aerobic incubation on day 21, since all benzene disappeared by day 14. It was found that several bands, such as bands 2 and 3, commonly appeared under different conditions, while some bands were specific, e.g., band 4 was seen under denitrifying conditions and bands 11 and 12 were seen under sulfidogenic conditions. In addition, many unique bands appeared under aerobic conditions. It is likely that the common bands (bands 2 and 3) represented organisms that utilized oxygen molecules (presumably contaminated during sampling) to assimilate benzene. In contrast, comparisons of bands occurring under the different electron-accepting conditions allowed us to identify phylotypes that specifically assimilated benzene under certain electron-accepting conditions, such as band 4, representing organisms assimilating benzene under denitrifying conditions. The nucleotide sequences of major bands were determined (Table 2), and band 4 was assigned to Azoarcus, a genus known to include bacteria capable of metabolizing aromatic hydrocarbons, such as toluene, xylene, and ethylbenzene, under denitrifying conditions (8, 19, 22, 42, 47, 48, 58). Recently, Ulrich and Edwards demonstrated that the dominant microbial population in a benzene-degrading denitrifying enrichment culture was closely related to Azoarcus species (52). In our previous study (49), an Azoarcus phylotype was widely detected by the PCR-DGGE analysis of groundwater taken from a gasoline-contaminated aquifer. In this study, we found that the nucleotide sequence of band 4 (Fig. 3) was 100% identical to that of the Azoarcus phylotype retrieved from the gasoline-contaminated aquifer, suggesting that the Azoarcus population represented by band 4 was at least partly responsible for mineralization of benzene in the gasoline-contaminated groundwater. Isolation of Azoarcus strains and phylogenetic analysis.In order to examine if bacteria represented by the Azoarcus phylotype were actually capable of degrading benzene under denitrifying conditions, we attempted to isolate them for axenic benzene degradation tests. The groundwater incubated for SIP under denitrifying conditions for 28 days was spread onto dCGY plates and incubated under aerobic and denitrifying conditions. We used dCGY medium because a previous study demonstrated that this medium facilitated the isolation of bacteria affiliated with the Betaproteobacteria from activated sludge (54). A total of 60 colonies (40 from aerobic and 20 from denitrifying plates) were picked and restreaked on the same medium for purification, and cells on the new plates were subjected to DGGE analysis of PCR-amplified 16S rRNA gene fragments. In the DGGE analysis, band positions were compared with that of band 4 in Fig. 3 on the same gels, and nucleotide sequences of bands migrating to the same position as band 4 were determined to confirm their identity. As a result, we obtained five colonies whose 16S rRNA gene fragments were 100% identical in nucleotide sequence to that in band 4; these were strains DN11, DN15, and DN47, isolated under denitrifying conditions, and strains AN9 and AN21, isolated under aerobic conditions. All of them were capable of aerobic growth in dCGY medium and were therefore maintained under aerobic conditions. Sequence analysis of the 16S rRNA gene fragments (>1,450 bp) found that their sequences included several mismatches (i.e., they had >99% sequence identity to each other), except for AN9 and AN21, whose 16S rRNA gene sequences were completely identical. Phylogenetic comparison of the 16S rRNA gene sequences with those of reference Azoarcus strains showed that these isolates were affiliated with the genus Azoarcus and were particularly related to Azoarcus evansii (99% sequence identity over 1,480 bp), which metabolizes such aromatic compounds as benzoate, toluene, and phenol under denitrifying conditions (4), and Azoarcus sp. strain ToN1 (99% sequence identity over 1,470 bp), which degrades toluene (42). Anaerobic benzene degradation in axenic cultures.The five isolated strains were examined for the ability to degrade BTX under denitrifying conditions (Table 3). We found that four strains, but not strain AN21, degraded toluene and m-xylene, while only two strains (DN11 and AN9) were capable of anaerobic benzene degradation. This observation revealed the variation in degradative capacity among these closely related Azoarcus strains. In particular, although the 16S rRNA gene sequences of strains AN9 and AN21 were 100% identical, their degradative capacities were very different. From these data and the 16S rRNA gene sequences, we tentatively identified that the five isolates are five different strains. Figure 4 presents growth curves for strains DN11 and AN9 grown in basal salt medium supplemented with 15 μM benzene as the sole carbon source. It is shown that benzene was degraded, concomitant with growth, when the culture was supplemented with nitrate. 