Therefore, approaches such as bioaugmentation are usually ruled out for in situ treatments and biostimulation approaches are preferred. By adding N and P, the C/N and C/P ratios in the soil approximate bacterial C/N and C/P requirements [6]. However, in our work, additional amendments to boost aerobic metabolism and pollutant bioavailability were required and a novel combination of a surfactant [15], an oleophilic fertilizer, plus an oxygen-releasing compound was used to foster both biodegradation and soil washing, thereby enhancing bioavailability. The results proved that after the sequential application of these three products, pollution levels clearly declined over a short period of time, which coincided with the exponential growth-phase of the microbial populations. Nevertheless, most of the contaminants were initially not very biodegradable. For instance, a noticeable weathering of hydrocarbons in the lubricant-polluted zone (Z2) was observed prior to treatment (Fig. 5c) in comparison with the pure compound that had been spilled (Fig. 5a,b). This chemical composition, consisting of a reduced presence of linear alkanes (caused by the long time that had elapsed since the spillages had occurred), should not have promoted significant microbial degradation. Nevertheless, the high specialization of the populations (see below) and the activity of both the surfactant and oleophilic fertilizer made the remaining linear alkanes and other branched and cyclic compounds available within a short period of time. Consequently, the contaminants were further degraded during the treatment (Fig. 5d). Similar behaviors were observed in the other zones studied, as shown in Fig. 6. These additional results reveal that most of the reduction (Table 2) of the TPH content in both groundwater and soil was due to microbial activity. As stated above, the process seemed to be particularly efficient during the first two months, when hydrocarbon-degraders were growing rapidly. This is not surprising if we consider the long historical record of hydrocarbon spillage at the site, which surely promoted the adaptation of microbial populations. As a conclusion, a dual phase pattern of degradation was observed that was characterized by initial fast degradation, followed by slow degradation. Similar microbial behavior has been reported by Vinas et al. [45] who found that the addition of nutrients resulted in a high first-order degradation rate during the first 45 days, which declined markedly after 90 days, at which point the sizes of heterotrophic and polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon (PAH) degrading microbial populations returned to the initial values. Analogous results were obtained by Kaplan et al. [27]: TPH degradation was rapid during the first 3 weeks and then it slowed down for the remainder of the 24 week project. During that study, a sharp increase in plate counts was reported during the first 3 weeks, indicating an increase in biomass associated with petroleum degradation. Fluorescent indicators of viability and/or activity have been widely used in bacteria studies [31], although their application to the environment, especially in bioremediation practices, has been scarcer [23]; [36] ; [16]. As shown in this work, these stains, in combination with CLSM observations, make it possible to directly observe the bacterial viability status in both in situ samples and during the enrichment process ( Fig. 4). These analyses provide a suitable complement to the investigation of bacterial groups and their degrading capabilities and will become increasingly useful in monitoring bacteria in, for example, bioaugmentation experiments [23]. With respect to the characteristics of the microbial communities involved in the degradation process, all the strains listed in Table 1 are capable of growing in both liquid and DM solid media with hydrocarbons as the sole carbon source. Most of these genera (Acinetobacter, Pseudomonas, Rhodococcus, Stenotrophomonas, etc.) 