In this work, we present our experience in the engineered in situ biostimulation of a hydrocarbon-polluted subsoil of an old metal-working plant. The site had a long history of fuel, lubricant oil, and diesel spills and leakages that were initially treated by means of physico-chemical techniques. After one year of treatment, weathered hydrocarbons were firmly sorbed in the unsaturated zone, limiting the effectiveness of the physico-chemical methods being applied. Also, low nutrient and dissolved oxygen levels limited natural attenuation yields. Therefore, a bioremediation approach based on the injection of hydrogen peroxide, an oleophilic fertilizer, and a surfactant was applied. Total petroleum hydrocarbons and gas chromatography-mass spectrometry determinations were performed as a chemical means of monitoring the process. Microbial populations, including the presence of hydrocarbon-degrading bacteria, were simultaneously analyzed during the process, using enrichment techniques and confocal laser scanning microscopy observations with fluorescent indicators. Hydrocarbon-degrading bacteria were already present in the polluted subsoil prior to the implementation of this bioremediation technique and increased noticeably during the first 2 months of treatment. Hence, the suitability of the nutrient and oxygen amending approach was confirmed as further demonstrated by chemical determinations. Soils and groundwater at many industrial sites are often contaminated by hydrocarbon that leaks from underground storage tanks or pipelines and by accidental spills. In situ bioremediation techniques have been used for years to remediate these hydrocarbon-polluted sites. Bioremediation is an environmentally friendly treatment and allows “brownfields” to be redeveloped by removing residual contaminants in soil and groundwater [39]. Specifically, in situ treatments are well-known and cost-effective methods that usually eliminate the need for expensive excavation and emission control [48]. Thus, microbiological decontamination of petroleum hydrocarbons in polluted environments is claimed to be an efficient, economic, and versatile alternative, or complement, to physico-chemical treatments [30] ; [26]. However, before starting in situ bioremediation protocols, it is important to establish the indigenous microbial potential and to assess the limiting factors to be controlled during treatment [21]. Aerobic treatments for hydrocarbon bioremediation are the preferred way to improve degradation yields, given that the most common degraders are aerobic [47]; [49] ; [10]. For this reason, engineering systems or chemical amendments are usually applied in order to oxygenate the groundwater and soil. For instance, both solid and liquid peroxides have been used in hydrocarbon bioremediation. In particular, hydrogen peroxide is probably the most widely used product, thanks to its high oxygen-releasing potential. Furthermore, this treatment is easy to dose, inexpensive, non-persistent, and safe when properly used [25] ; [38]. Another constraint that must be considered for effective bioremediation, is the nutrient level at the site of intervention. Oleophilic fertilizers are one of the most widely used products for natural environment amendment. In light of the fact that they adhere to hydrocarbons and provide nutrients at the oil–water interface, they have been extensively applied in marine oil spills [7] ; [11]. Moreover, recent developments have proposed the usefulness of these products for treating hydrocarbon-polluted groundwater and soil [19]. The presence of bacteria with degrading capacities is a critical aspect of bioremediation [18]; [9] ; [27], while the availability of contaminants is a major factor in biodegradation [21]. Hydrocarbon-degrading microorganisms produce a variety of surface-active agents that improve bioavailability [40], but an exogenous surfactant may still be required when the contaminants are highly hydrophobic and/or firmly sorbed in clay particles or organic matter within the soil. Therefore, surfactants have been used in bioremediation technologies to improve the bioavailability of organic compounds and, hence, biodegradation rates [46]; [29] ; [35]. With the aforementioned considerations in mind and after a complete screening, it was decided that the field approach applied in this work would consist of the addition of an oleophilic fertilizer, an oxygen-releasing compound (hydrogen peroxide), and a commercial surfactant. The microbial community and populations of hydrocarbon-degraders were monitored simultaneously with the changes in the composition of the contaminants as an evaluation of the effectiveness of the in situ approach selected. 