The chlorophenols would then be susceptible to polymerization reactions in soils containing plant and fungal phenol oxidizing enzymes. Likewise, anaerobic metabolism of nitroaromatics to reduced intermediates would be expected to enhance the polymerization of these compounds in soil. Anaerobic-aerobic cocultures The sequenced biological treatment of chloroaromatics, nitroaromatics and azo dyes in separated anaerobic and aerobic phases clearly indicates that the biodegradation of these persistent pollutants can be enhanced by the combined activities of distinct microbial consortia. The consortia do not necessarily have to be separated in different reactors or distinct periods of operation. Evidence in the literature indicates that anaerobic and aerobic consortia can occur side by side. Strict anaerobes can occur in anaerobic microniches located inside biofilms and aggregates. Many anaerobes also have the ability to survive periodic exposure to oxygen. Even cells of aerobically grown bacteria may be able to carry out typical anaerobic bioconversions under conditions of oxygen limitation. Therefore, anaerobic and aerobic biodegradative capacities can be utilized synchronously in one bioreactor. Anaerobic microniches in aerobic environments Paradoxically, aerobic bacteria create anaerobic environments by the consumption of oxygen. Oxygen has a low solubility and a slow diffusibility in water (Cussler 1992; Geankoplis 1983). Consequently when there is an excess of readily metabolizable substrate compared to the oxygen supply, anaerobic environments are created. Aerobic wastewater treatment is only made possible by forced convective transport of oxygen achieved by vigorous mixing. Even in well aerated systems as soon as there is a barrier to mixing, the 02 supply will become rate limiting. In wastewater treatment systems or during bioremediation of soils and sediments, such barriers are known to be caused by biofilms, settled layers of particles or soil aggregates, which provide resistance to convective mass transport (Cussler 1992; Geankoplis 1983). Thus, oxygen supply to deep positions is almost exclusively limited to the slow process of diffusion (De Beer 1990; Hooijmans 1990). Based on these observations, anaerobic microniches can be expected to occur inside particulate matrices which are located in aerobic macroenvironments. In aerobic bioreactors with immobilized biomass, oxygen limitation is due to the biofilm itself. Under steady state conditions, zones of decreasing oxygen concentration will be formed towards the centre of the biofilm. The depth of penetration will depend on the diffusion and consumption of oxygen. The diffusion will be most influenced by the oxygen concentration in the bulk liquid phase and the thickness of the biofilm; while oxygen consumption is influenced by the presence of readily metabolizable substrates. Several investigators have used microsensors to determine the oxygen profiles within aerobic biofilms or within gel beads containing microorganisms actively respiring substrates, usually resulting in gradients from the oxic outer layers to the anoxic layers in the centre (De Beer 1990; Hooijmans 1990; Peters et al. 1987; Revsbech et al. 1989; Wijffels et al. 1991). Model systems with the 02 consuming enzyme, Llactate-oxygen-2-oxidoreductase, immobilized in gel beads, clearly indicated the role of increasing oxygen uptake rate (established by varying the enzyme concentration) on the decreasing depth of oxygen penetration (Hooijmans 1990). Similar results were also obtained by varying the O2-uptake rate with different concentrations of Escherichia coli immobilized in gel beads supplied with glucose as substrate (Hooijmans 1990) as illustrated in Fig. 7. When the concentration of active aerobic bacteria exceeds 1 g biomass L-1 of immobilized phase, a general finding is that oxygen rarely penetrates more than a few hundred #m due to the relatively rapid uptake of oxygen compared to the slow diffusion. 