In subtrate limited systems such as soils, the 02 uptake rate is slower and consequently deeper 02 penetration would be expected. Oxygen microprofiles of typical silt loam soil aggregates indicate a penetration of 3 mm (Tiedje et al. 1984). Consequently, anaerobic microorganisms located inside reactor biofilms or soil aggregates would be adequately protected against contact with oxygen, allowing the occurrence of denitrification, sulphate reduction or methanogenesis. The occurrence of these anaerobic microniches in environments with a well aerated bulk phase is best illustrated by the isolation of strict anaerobes from aerobic activated sludge. The fact that methanogens are present in aerobic sludge was demonstrated when Methanothrix soehngenii could be enriched from such samples (Huser et al. 1982). Activated sludge is often used successfully as seed for the start-up of anaerobic wastewater treatment reactors (Noyola & Moreno 1994; Wu et al. 1987). The success can be attributed to the presence of methanogenic bacteria in the aerobic sludge. Methanobacterium, Methanococcus and Methanosarcina were observed in both the original aerobic activated sludge flocs and the anaerobic granular sludge formed. According to fluorescent microscopic examination, several anaerobic nuclei were identified deep inside flocs of the original aerobic sludge (Wu et al. 1987). A strictly anaerobic tetrachloroethene reducing bacterium was also isolated from aerobic activated sludge (Neumann et al. 1994). Additionally, oxic marine sediments are considered to be reducing environments covered only by a thin highly oxidized surface layer (Battersby et al. 1985; Jurgensen 1977). The obligate anaerobe Desulfovibrio sp. was isolated from within sediment aggregates, while the sulphide oxidizing bacterium Beggiatoa sp. was found in the surface layer. The occurrence of pyrite in the oxidized layer can only be explained by the rapid oxidation of Fe 2+ to Fe 3+ on the one hand, and the formation of H2S from sulfate reduction on the other (Jurgensen 1977). The occurrence of denitrification in soil while oxygen is present in the macroporosity was shown to be related to anaerobic zones formed within the soil aggregates (Tiedje et al. 1984). The rate of denitrification was shown to be highly correlated to the anaerobic volume fraction of the soil aggregate as calculated on the basis of oxygen diffusion- and consumption-rates. Tolerance of strict anaerobes to oxygen Many anaerobes have the ability to survive periodic exposure to oxygen which might be encountered in fluctuating conditions of oxygen supply. Oxygen is considered as a suspect toxic compound since severaI investigations reported a detrimental effect, especially for several metbanogens which are usually regarded as strict anaerobes (Hungate 1969; Whitman et al. 1992). Oxygen is a powerful reactant because reduced species such as superoxide and eventually hydrogen peroxide are spontaneously generated which are potentially toxic radicals to all living cells (Gottschalk & Peinemann 1992; Morris 1979). The toxic effect can damage the chromosomal DNA, as was suggested for Roseburia cecicola which is a strict anaerobe considered intolerant to oxygen (Martin & Savage 1988). 