fragilis submitted to different conditions of redox alone revealed that there was no detectable change in the viable cell density. However, the introduction of oxygen to 10- 100% of atmospheric saturation during 6 h resulted in a steady decline in the viable cell density. The mechanism of oxygen-mediated inhibition was assumed to be due to the formation of superoxide radicals. However, the effect was bacteriostatic rather than bactericidal. The explanation for the bacteriostatic effect was that cells of B. fragilis contained SOD, which was demonstrated in parallel investigations (Onderdonk et al. 1976). The most noteworthy group of strict anaerobic bacteria involved in wastewater treatment processes are the methanogens. Since the early works on the isolation of pure cultures of Methanosarcina barkeri and Methanobacteriumformicicum, the widespread view is that the methanogens are fastidious microorganisms requiring strict anaerobic conditions for growth and methane production. Anaerobic conditions for working with methanogenic bacterial cultures are ensured by the Hungate-technique which is still employed today with some modifications (Hungate 1969). Possible traces of oxygen are eliminated by the addition of reducing agents such as cysteine or sulphide, to poise the redox potential within the low range. Indeed many methanogens are acutely sensitive to oxygen. Methanococcus voltae and Methanococcus vannielii were shown to be highly intolerant to oxygen which corresponded to their lack of SOD (Kiener & Leisinger 1983). Also, two thermophilic methanogens isolated from a 55°C anaerobic kelp digester were shown to cease immediately both growth and methane production, after being exposed to only 0.1% oxygen in the head space (Ferguson & Mah 1983). Methanobac- terium ruminantium, Methanobacterium mobile and Methanobacterium sp. strain AZ were also found to be highly sensitive to oxygen since their growth and methane production were completely prevented at 0.01 ppm dissolved oxygen (Zehnder & Wuhrmann 1977). However, other investigations indicate that at least some methanogens do have intrinsic tolerance to oxygen. Only a slow decline was observed in the methane production of Methanobacterium sp. strain M.o.H. actively metabolizing H2 when it was exposed to oxygen (Roberton & Wolfe 1970). Oxygen tolerance was also observed among several species of bacteria in the order Methanomicrobiales and Methanobacterium bryantii, and was attributed to SOD, which was detected and correlated to the defense against oxygen toxicity (Kiener & Leisinger 1983; Kirby et al. 1981). Methanobacterium thermoautotrophicum, Methanobrevibacter arboriphilus and Methanosarcina barkeri strains, which were originally isolated from sludge digesters, survived for hours in the presence of air without decrease in the number of colony forming units (Kiener & Leisinger 1983; Kirby et al. 1981). Enrichment cultures of Methanothrix soehngenii derived from anaerobic sludge digesters were exposed to pure oxygen for 48 hours. The exposure did not cause cell lysis nor loss in methane producing activity compared to controls (Huser et al. 1982). Methanobacterium and Methanosarcina strains are also commonly isolated from dry and oxic paddy soil, demonstrating that they can survive under aerobic conditions between the flooding periods. That methanogenesis starts within a few days after flooding was confirmed in research with the isolated pure cultures of Methanosarcina barkeri strain Fusaro, Methanosarcina sp. strain MVF4 and Methanobacterium sp. 