strain HVF5 (Fetzer et al. 1993). Aside from the intrinsic tolerance due to the SOD that some methanogenic species possess, other factors have been postulated to be involved in protection against oxygen. Methanosarcina barkeri strain Fusaro was shown to have a number of redox carriers decreasing the redox potential when chemical oxidant agents were used. However, this reducing capacity was not enough to avoid the inhibition by oxygen at concentrations higher than 0.5% in the gas phase. Nonetheless, the capacity to adjust the redox potential in its own redox environment may partly explain good survival in dry and oxic soil (Fetzer & Conrad 1993). The existence of cells in aggregates can also affect the oxygen tolerance. This seemed to be the case for a Methanosarcina strain that showed higher oxygen tolerance in cell aggregates compared with dispersed cells (Kiener & Leisinger 1983). Tolerance to oxygen in mixed culture Natural mixed cultures represent complex consortia of microorganisms, where the consumption of oxygen in an anaerobic reactor can very likely occur due to the presence of facultative bacteria in the anaerobic sludges. When oxygen was placed in the headspace of serum bottles or chemostats containing natural methanogenic consortia, 02 consumption started directly (Gerritse et al. 1990; Kato et al. 1993a; Shelton & Tiedje 1984). The initial specific 02 consuming activity of granular anaerobic sludge recovered from various UASB reactors and fed with ethanol ranged from 1 to 11 g 02 g-1 VSS d -1 (Kato et al. 1993b), indicating ample activity of facultative bacteria in natural mixed cultures of anaerobic bacteria. Thus regardless of the intrinsic tolerance that has been reported for some strict anaerobes such as methanogens, the creation of anaerobic environments by facultative bacteria is probably the most important factor for the protection of methanogens in anaerobic sludges against 02 exposure. The 50% inhibiting concentration (50% IC) of various samples of anaerobic granular sludge exposed to oxygen for three days ranged from 7 to 41% 02 in the head space at the start of the exposure period. These values corresponded to dissolved oxygen concentrations ranging from 0.05 to 6.1 mg L -1 in the bulk liquid phase at the end of the exposure period (Kato et al. 1993b). The 50% IC values were found to be highly correlated to specific 02 uptake rates of the sludges tested which clearly indicates that the consumption of oxygen was a major factor in the remarkably high tolerance to oxygen (Fig. 8). Considering that the penetration of oxygen in active biofilms would only be a few hundred micrometers and that the granules had diameters ranging from 1.3 to 2.8 mm, voluminous anaerobic zones were most likely present inside the granules where the methanogenic bacteria were protected from contact with 02. Anaerobic activity of aerobic bacteria Anaerobic activity is not restricted to strict anaerobic bacteria. The cells of aerobically grown bacteria may be able to carry out typical anaerobic reactions in reducing environments. Since aerobes can grow faster than anaerobes, utilizing cells of aerobic bacteria can facilitate the implantation of a mixed anaerobic-aerobic process. Many aerobic bacteria are able to reduce aromatic electron-withdrawing substituents when incubated anaerobically just as anaerobes can. Moreover, some strains of aerobic bacteria can carry out unique reactions under anaerobic conditions. Aerobic activated sludge was used in anaerobic incubations to reductively dechlorinate 4,4'- dichlorobiphenyl to 4-chlorobiphenyl (Mavoungou et al. 1991). Anaerobically incubated activated sludge also caused the reduction of 2,4-dinitrotoluene to 2-nitroso-4-nitrotoluene, 4-nitroso-2-nitrotoluene, 2-amino-4-nitrotoluene and 4-amino-2-nitrotoluene when a suitable electron donor was provided (Liu et al. 