Two different phylotypes of Alcanivorax spp. were abundant in our pyrosequence libraries, and previous work has shown that the physiology of Alcanivorax is likely to be strain specific (27). As with other functional guilds of bacteria, the taxonomy of hydrocarbon degraders is rapidly evolving. Many species have not been validly described. Of those that have been formally described, the phenotype of most strains has been largely characterized using Biolog testing. Biolog tests are effective for range finding and for testing many strains at once, as we have done here. However, these should be considered as preliminary, and they require verification with traditional physiological screening in pure culture. A further understanding of the ecophysiology of hydrocarbon degraders will be crucial to uncovering the in situ controls of oil degradation and to the development of improved mitigation strategies for oil spills. Through the isolation of model organisms, physiological testing of isolates, and genome sequencing, the activity, physiological potential and environmental distribution of hydrocarbon degraders can be confirmed and understood. Conclusions.The quantitative increase in bacterial gene sequences, the increased relative abundance of known oil-degrading taxa, and the isolation of oil-degrading pure cultures from many of the same taxa confirmed the strong selective response of indigenous bacterial communities in Pensacola Beach sands to the presence of oil from the DH oil spill. We hypothesize that Alcanivorax spp. of the Gammaproteobacteria are effective microbial indicators or sentinels of the early stages of oil hydrocarbon degradation in Gulf beach sands when more reactive components such as n-alkanes abound, whereas members of the Alphaproteobacteria (Labrenzia and Rhodobacteraceae) and Gram-positive groups (Bacillus and Microbacterium) may be used as sentinels for the later stages of degradation when more recalcitrant oil hydrocarbon compounds such as PAHs predominate. In addition, we provide a number of pure cultures from these groups that may be used as model organisms to investigate the physiological ecology of hydrocarbon degraders in benthic habitats of the Gulf of Mexico. Further study is needed to delineate the specific role for each of these groups in hydrocarbon degradation on contaminated beaches. 