We further show that the abundance of the known hydrocarbonoclastic group of Alcanivorax spp. increased in response to oil contamination, and a comparison of bacterial ribosome abundance in RNA extracts indicated that Alcanivorax abundance was proportionately greater within the active bacterial community (data not shown). Few previous studies have applied quantitative molecular approaches to determine the abundance of hydrocarbon degraders in situ. In a field bioremediation experiment, Singh et al. (68) reported an elevated abundance of Alcanivorax spp. in beach plots amended with oil plus fertilizer but not in plots treated with oil alone. Oil began to come ashore at Pensacola Beach in early June, and we observed a bloom of Alcanivorax spp. and overall bacteria by early July, approximately 4 weeks after the initial oiling event. Maximum abundance was observed in our aerobic bacterial cultures after 1 to 2 weeks of incubation. Thus, our results indicate that the native microbial communities in beach sands respond fairly quickly to oil contamination, metabolizing oil to support growth at a rate which is within a factor of 2 to 4 in comparison to pure cultures. Coupled with our observation that oiled sands were depleted in low-molecular-weight aliphatic and aromatic hydrocarbons, the elevated abundance of hydrocarbon degraders provides an early indication that natural attenuation is a viable strategy for the mitigation of oil contamination in Pensacola Beach sands. The proportion of Alcanivorax spp. to the total community was lower at Pensacola Beach in comparison to past studies which used nutrient amendments to stimulate biodegradation. Conditions in subtropical sands (temperature, oxygen supply, and nutrients; see below) appear to favor a broader diversity of hydrocarbon degraders that might render biostimulation unnecessary. The in situ metabolism of oil-degrading bacteria is likely to be limited by a number of environmental parameters, including temperature, the availability of oxygen and major nutrients, oil hydrocarbon content, and weathering or dispersal of the oil (59). Temperatures in this subtropical environment remain optimal for microbial growth throughout the summer, and oxygen profiling indicates that the Pensacola Beach sands remained aerobic throughout the study period with oxygen concentrations at all sampled depth >90% of sediment surface oxygen concentration. The rapid in situ growth we observed after 4 weeks indicates that microbial cells had access to the oil. The majority of our beach sand samples were collected in the supratidal zone and the interstitial pore space of these sands was not saturated with seawater. Therefore, we conclude that the growth of oil-degrading communities was likely limited by desiccation and/or nutrient depletion in the Pensacola Beach sands we studied. Desiccation would exacerbate carbon and nutrient depletion by shutting off the supply of dissolved substrates from inundating tidal waters. In corroboration of previous work on marine sands in the Gulf of Mexico (30, 53), we observed that Pensacola Beach sands contain highly diverse bacterial communities that are predominated by members of the Gammaproteobacteria and Alphaproteobacteria (Fig. 5 and Table 5). Bacterial diversity was higher in beach sands in comparison to the bacterioplankton communities that we sampled (see the supplemental material). Shannon indices place the bacterial communities of beach sands (see Table S1 in the supplemental material) as more diverse than bacterioplankton but not as diverse as the bacterial communities of marine muds or soils (54). Concomitant with changes to bacterial abundance, a pronounced shift in bacterial community structure was observed in Pensacola Beach sands in response to DH oil contamination (Fig. 4). These results emphasize that the embedded oil exerted a strong selective pressure on the sand bacterial community, in concurrence with past research (see reviews by Berthi-Corti and Nachtkamp [5] and Greer [23]). The consensus of studies conducted in oil-contaminated marine environments points to a succession of bacterial populations associated with the early stages of contamination reflecting the initial utilization of various highly degradable hydrocarbon compound classes (aliphatics, aromatics, and polyaromatics [27]). In our study, shifts in community composition in beach sands in response to oil presence were manifested at the strain to family level (Table 5), but little to no change was observed at the class level (Fig. 