Physical State of the Oil or Hydrocarbons Oil spilled in water tends to spread and form a slick (25). As a result of wind and wave action, oil-in-water or waterin-oil ("mousse") emulsions may form (45). Dispersion of hydrocarbons in the water column in the form of oil-in-water emulsions increases the surface area of the oil and thus its availability for microbial attack. However, large masses (or plates) of mousse establish unfavorably low surface-tovolume ratios, inhibiting biodegradation (49). Tarballs, which are large aggregates of weathered and undegraded oil, also restrict access by microorganisms because of their limited surface area (43). The formation of emulsions through the microbial production and release of biosurfactants is an important process in the uptake of hydrocarbons by bacteria and fungi (125). Broderick and Cooney (32) reported that 96% of hydrocarbon-utilizing bacteria isolated from freshwater lakes were able to emulsify kerosene, and it has been observed that mixed cultures of marine (108) and soil (77) bacteria which effectively degrade crude oil also exhibit strong emulsifying activity. Artificial dispersants have been studied as a means of increasing the surface area and hence the biodegradability of oil slicks. Dispersant formulations used in the 1960s were highly toxic, and their application to oiled intertidal areas following the Torrey Canyon spill resulted in widespread mortality of flora and fauna (48, 126). More recently developed dispersants, such as Corexit, are considerably less toxic (52), but still have been shown to inhibit microbial processes (63). The effectiveness of dispersants in enhancing the biodegradation of oil has been shown to be extremely variable and to be dependent on the chemical formulation of the dispersant, its concentration, and the dispersant/oil application ratio. Studies with different dispersants have reported increases (112), decreases (56, 93), and transitory or slight increases (56, 93, 136) in the rates of microbial degradation of crude oil and individual hydrocarbons. The key differences between petroleum biodegradation in soil and aquatic ecosystems following an oil spill, discussed by Bossert and Bartha (29), are related to the movement and distribution of the oil and the presence of particulate matter, each of which affects the physical and chemical nature of the oil and hence its susceptibility to microbial degradation. Terrestrial oil spills are characterized primarily by vertical movement of the oil into the soil, rather than the horizontal spreading associated with slick formation. Infiltration of oil into the soil prevents evaporative losses of volatile hydrocarbons, which can be toxic to microorganisms. Particulate matter can reduce, by absorption, the effective toxicity of the components of petroleum, but absorption and adsorption of hydrocarbons to humic substances probably contribute to the formation of persistent residues. Concentration of the Oil or Hydrocarbons The rates of uptake and mineralization of many organic compounds by microbial populations in the aquatic environment are proportional to the concentration of the compound, generally conforming to Michaelis-Menten kinetics (28, 105). Michaelian kinetics have been demonstrated for the microbial uptake and oxidation of toluene (35, 111), a lowmolecular-weight aromatic hydrocarbon of relatively high water solubility, but may not apply to the more insoluble hydrocarbons. The rates of mineralization of the highermolecular-weight aromatic hydrocarbons, such as naphthalene and phenanthrene, are related to aqueous solubilities rather than total substrate concentrations (135, 152, 153). The microbial degradation of long (.C12) alkanes, for which solubilities are less than 0.01 mg/liter (23), occurs at rates which exceed the rates of hydrocarbon dissolution (135, 156) and are a function of the hydrocarbon surface area available for emulsification or physical attachment by cells (55, 94, 148). Biodegradation rates for many hydrocarbons, therefore, will not display the dependence on concentration which is typically observed with more soluble organic substrates. High concentrations of hydrocarbons can be associated with heavy, undispersed oil slicks in water, causing inhibition of biodegradation by nutrient or oxygen limitation or through toxic effects exerted by volatile hydrocarbons (see below). Fusey and Oudot (59) reported that contamination of seashore sediments with crude oil above a threshold concentration prevented biodegradation of the oil because of oxygen and/or nutrient limitation. It is likely that high concentrations of oil have similarly negative effects on biodegradation rates following oil spills in other quiescent, low-energy environments such as beaches, harbors, and small lakes or ponds, in which the oil is relatively protected from dispersion by wind and wave action. Rashid (109), for example, observed that the lowest rates of degradation of crude oil spilled from an oil tanker occurred in protected bays and the highest rates occurred in the areas of greatest wave energy. microbial degradation of hydrocarbons may apply also to soil ecosystems. Dibble and Bartha (51) reported increases in CO2 evolution over the range of 1.25 to 5% hydrocarbon mass per dry weight of soil, when oil sludge was applied to soil. No increase was observed at a level of 10%, and the rates declined at 15%. Decreases in activity at high oil loading concentrations were ascribed to inhibition of microbial activity by toxic components of the oil sludge. 