Microbial seeding from a chemostat has also been used in conjunction with conventional activated-sludge treatment to improve the ability of a refinery wastewater treatment plant to absorb intermittently high loads of hydrocarbons (154). The combination of microbial seeding with conventional large-scale treatment methods to improve the removal of hydrocarbons is therefore feasible and merits additional study. The biodegradation of petroleum and other hydrocarbons in the environment is a complex process, whose quantitative and qualitative aspects depend on the nature and amount of the oil or hydrocarbons present, the ambient and seasonal environmental conditions, and the composition of the autochthonous microbial community. Microbial degradation of oil has been shown to occur by attack on aliphatic or light aromatic fractions of the oil, with high-molecular-weight aromatics, resins, and asphaltenes considered to be recalcitrant or exhibiting only very low rates of biodegradation, although some studies have reported their removal at high rates under optimal conditions. In aquatic ecosystems, dispersion and emulsification of oil in oil slicks appear to be prerequisites for rapid biodegradation; large masses of mousse, tarballs, or high concentrations of oil in quiescent environments tend to persist because of low surface areas available for microbial activity. Petroleum spilled on or applied to soil is largely adsorbed to particulate matter, decreasing its toxicity but possibly also contributing to its persistence. Biodegradation rates generally increase with increasing temperature; ecosystems exposed to extremely low temperatures degrade hydrocarbons very slowly. The microbial degradation of petroleum in aquatic environments is limited primarily by nutrients such as nitrogen and phosphorus; salinity and pressure may be important in estuarine and deep-sea regions, respectively. Oxygen, nutrient concentrations, moisture, and pH are predominant factors in determining biodegradation rates in soil. Hydrocarbon degradation by microbial communities depends on the composition of the community and its adaptive response to the presence of hydrocarbons. Bacteria and fungi are the key agents of degradation, with bacteria assuming the dominant role in marine ecosystems and fungi becoming more important in freshwater and terrestrial environments. Adapted communities, i.e., those which have been previously exposed to hydrocarbons, exhibit higher biodegradation rates than communities with no history of hydrocarbon contamination. The mechanisms of adaptation include both selective enrichment and genetic changes, resulting in a net increase in the number of hydrocarbonutilizing organisms and in the pool of hydrocarbon-catabolizing genes within the community. The association of such genes with plasmid DNA may also lead to an increased frequency of plasmid-bearing microorganisms. Seeding of petroleum-contaminated water or soils with hydrocarbonutilizing bacteria has met with some success, particularly in situations in which chemostats or fermentors have been used to control conditions and reduce competition from indigenous microflora. Probably the most significant recent developments in hydrocarbon biodegradation ecology involve the demonstration of anaerobic metabolism of aromatic hydrocarbons and application of DNA probes to the analysis of genetic adaptation of microbial communities upon exposure to aromatic hydrocarbons. The expansion of the DNA probe method to the detection of genes encoding the catabolism of other classes of hydrocarbons, as well as to the detection of specific RNAs, should revolutionize the study of the microbial degradation of hydrocarbons in the environment and remove many of the biases and limitations imposed by conventional culture techniques. Recombinant DNA technology may also allow the construction of bacterial and fungal strains exhibiting improved capability for hydrocarbon metabolism and suitability as seed organisms for the elimination of hydrocarbon pollutants, but field studies must await the resolution of the issue of release of genetically engineered microorganisms into the environment. 