Contigs <1800 bp were assembled using Newbler (Life Technologies, Carlsbad, CA, USA) in an attempt to generate larger contigs (flags: −tr, −rip, −mi 98 and −ml 60). All assembled contigs >1800 bp, as well as the contigs generated from the final Newbler run, were combined using minimus 2 (AMOS, http://sourceforge.net/projects/amos) and the default parameters for joining. Minimus2 is an overlap-based assembly tool that is useful for combining low numbers of longer sequences, as are found in assembled contigs. Assembly of the total of 368 million paired-end quality filtered metagenome sequence reads that averaged 113 bp in length (45 Gb) resulted in 1.1 million contigs. These contigs had an average N50 length of 382 bp (N50 is the length of the smallest contig in the set of largest contigs that have a combined length that represents at least 50% of the assembly (Miller et al., 2010)). Assembled data was annotated in IMG (Markowitz et al., 2008). Cluster of Orthologous (COG) annotations for both plume samples and the uncontaminated sample, including average fold, were exported. A pairwise statistical comparison of COGs in each of the three samples was carried out using STAMP (Parks and Beiko, 2010). Raw Illumina metatranscriptomic reads (~100 bp in length) were assembled using the CLC Genomics Workbench (version 4.0.3; CLC Bio, Cambridge, MA, USA). Paired-end reads were assembled using the following parameters: mismatch cost 2, insertions cost 3, deletion cost 3, length fraction 0.5 and similarity 0.8. The minimum contig length was set to 200 bp. Assembled metatranscriptomic data was annotated using CAMERA (v2.0.6.2) (Seshadri et al., 2007). blastn Single reads from each metagenomic and metatranscriptomic sample was searched against the Greengenes (DeSantis et al., 2006) database of 16S rRNA genes using blastn with a bit score cutoff of >100. For each sequence, the blast result with the highest bit score was selected. tblastn Raw metagenomic, metatranscriptomic and single-cell reads were searched against a subset of proteins (~12 000 archaeal and bacterial proteins) involved in hydrocarbon degradation from the GeoChip (He et al., 2010) database. This database was selected because, to our knowledge, this is the only curated database of the nearly complete pathways for hydrocarbon degradation. Paracel blast was used with the tblastn algorithm, allowing all possible hits and using a bit score cutoff of >40. For each sequence, the blast result with the highest bit score was selected. Although putative and potential proteins were part of the overall database searched, only characterized proteins were included in the final data analysis and presentation. A pairwise statistical comparison of the results of the metagenomic and metatranscriptomic blast analyses was carried out using STAMP (Parks and Beiko, 2010), using the a two-sided Chi-square test (with Yates) statistic with the DP: asymptotic-CC confidence interval method and the Bonferroni multiple test correction. A P-value of >0.05 was used with a double-effect size filter (difference between proportions effect size <1.00 and a ratio of proportions effect size <2.00). Single-cell sorting, whole-genome amplification and screening Cells were collected following the clean sorting procedures detailed by Rodrigue et al. (2009). Briefly, single cells from the proximal plume water sample were sorted by the Cytopeia Influx Cell Sorter (BD Biosciences, Franklin Lakes, NJ, USA) into three 96-well plates containing 3 μl of ultraviolet-treated TE. The cells were stained with SYBR Green I (Invitrogen) and illuminated by a 488-nm laser (Coherent Inc., Santa Clara, CA, USA). The sorting window was based on the size determined by side scatter and green fluorescence (531/40 bp filter). Single cells were lysed for 20 min at room temperature using alkaline solution from the Repli-G UltraFast Mini Kit (Qiagen) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. After neutralization, the samples were amplified using the RepliPHI Phi29 reagents (Epicentre Biotechnologies). Each 50-μl reaction contained Phi29 Reaction Buffer (1 × final concentration), 50 μM random hexamers with the phosphorothioate bonds between the last two nucleotides at the 3′ end d (IDT), 0.4 mM dNTP, 5% DMSO (Sigma, St Louis, MO, USA), 10 mM DTT (Sigma), 100 U Phi29 and 0.5 mM Syto 13 (Invitrogen). 