Subsequently, the single cells were screened on the basis of their 16S rRNA gene sequences for those with high sequence quality and that were >95% similar to the dominant Oceanospirillales OTU. After sequencing on the Illumina platform, two of these cells yielded high-quality sequences, which were concatenated and assembled, resulting in a single-draft genome. The single cells were most closely related (partial 16S rRNA gene) to an uncultured Oceanospirillales (99% similar) from the oil spill (Redmond and Valentine, 2011). Closest cultured representatives were Oleispira antarctica (Yakimov et al., 2003) (97% similar) and Thalassolituus oleivorans (97% similar), both of which degrade aliphatic hydrocarbons (C10–C18 and C7–C20, respectively) (Yakimov et al., 2003; Yakimov et al., 2004). However, genome sequences are not available for either of these isolates. There are 10 Oceanospirillales genome sequences available in IMG (Markowitz et al., 2008), the most well characterized being Alcanivorax borkumensis (Schneiker et al., 2006). As a rough estimate, the assembled single-cell Oceanospirillales draft genome (1.9 Mb genome with 876 contigs, N50 of 5030 bp and longest contig 25 481 bp) represented more than half a complete genome based on comparisons to the 3.1-Mb genome of A. borkumensis. A. borkumensis is typically found at low abundance in unpolluted marine environments (Schneiker et al., 2006), but can represent as much as 90% of petroleum-degrading microbial communities (Harayama et al., 1999). The 16S rRNA gene sequences for our single cells were <88% similar to A. borkumensis, and thus represent a different genus within the Oceanospirillales. Additionally, by comparison of the annotated COGs from the draft genome assembly with those within the Gammaproteobacteria, the draft genome was 53% complete at the phylum level and 52% complete at the sub-phylum level. We also examined all of the raw, unassembled reads for each single-cell genome to ensure that all of the sequence data were analyzed. Within the draft genome, we used CAMERA (Seshadri et al., 2007) to obtain gene annotations in the assembled contigs. The annotations included putative genes encoding methyl-accepting chemotaxis proteins, flagella, pili and signal transduction mechanisms, all of which were present in the metagenomes and expressed in the plume interval (Figure 5, Supplementary Figures S4 and S5). Physical evidence of microbial cell attraction to oil in the proximal plume sample was also provided by synchrotron radiation-based Fourier-transform infrared spectromicroscopy that revealed sharp absorptions at ~1640 and ~1548 cm−1 in the fingerprint region (between 1800 and 900 cm−1) that are interpreted as Macondo oil droplets surrounded by microorganisms (Supplementary Figure S6). Together, the physical and molecular evidence suggest that bacterial cells were actively attracted to and interacted with oil in the hydrocarbon plume. Figure 5. Figure 5 - Unfortunately we are unable to provide accessible alternative text for this. If you require assistance to access this image, please contact help@nature.com or the author Oceanospirillales single-cell metabolic reconstruction using COG annotations of assembled sequence data and the blast comparison of unassembled single-cell reads to genes involved in hydrocarbon degradation. All genes in the single-cell metabolic reconstruction were present in the metagenomes and most were expressed in the metatranscriptome, except for those with an asterisk following the gene name. Several key functions were recently identified as important for several low-abundance marine surface bacteria to rapidly respond and bloom when conditions become more energy-rich. These included the capacity for chemotaxis and motility, which we found in the draft genome, the metagenomes and metatranscriptome. Clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeat regions to protect from phage predation (Yooseph et al., 2010) were also identified in the Oceanospirillales draft genome, suggesting a mechanism for avoiding phage predation. Closer investigation of the draft genome revealed genes for uptake of a suite of nutrients, all of which were also found in the metagenomes and expressed in the plume metatranscriptome. For example, COGs involved in uptake of nitrogen (ammonia permease), phosphate (ABC-type phosphate/phosphonate transport system, permease component), iron (ABC-type Fe3+ siderophore transport system, permease component, siderophore interacting protein and Fe2+ transport system proteins), sulfur (sulfate permease and related transporters), Cobalt, Cadmium and Zinc (transporters) were detected in all three data sets (see Supplementary Table S5). We also analyzed the unassembled Oceanospirillales single-cell reads for genes involved in hydrocarbon degradation and searched for genes with closest similarities to previously characterized genes based on bit scores greater than or equal to40. Consistent with what we observed in the metagenomic and metatranscriptomic data, the Oceanospirillales draft genome had genes with closest similarities to those coding for the cyclohexane degradation pathway. This aliphatic degradation pathway is similar to what was proposed for A. borkumensis (Schneiker et al., 2006). We did not find evidence in the draft genome for ethane or propane oxidation, which Redmond and Valentine (2011) suggested as a potential metabolic role for the Oceanospirillales observed in their SIP experiments. Top of page Conclusion In this study, we determined that the dominant and active, yet uncultured, Oceanospirillales possessed genes that encode the nearly complete pathway for cyclohexane degradation. 