MC-1, Pyrobaculum aerophilum str. IM2, Alkalilimnicola ehrlichei MLHE-1, Desulfohalobium retbaense DSM 5692, sulfate-reducing bacterium QLNR1 and Syntrophobacter fumaroxidans MPOB were frequently detected in each sample, while most of the genes detected were from uncultured microorganisms (for example, sulfate-reducing bacteria) from various environments. The results suggest that sulfate reduction could be enhanced when coupled with HC degradation. Phosphorus and iron reduction As phosphorus is often a limiting factor for oil bioremediation, it is essential to understand phosphorus cycling in marine ecosystems. Genes encoding exopolyphosphatase (ppx) for inorganic polyphosphate degradation and phytase for phytate degradation were detected with significantly (P<0.01 and P<0.05, respectively) increased abundance in plume samples (Supplementary Figure S7). These results suggested that organic phosphorus release could be stimulated by oil contamination. In addition, higher (P<0.1) signal intensities for 61 detected cytochrome c genes were observed in plume samples (Supplementary Figure S8), suggesting that HC degradation coupled with metal reduction could occur in the deep water. Metal resistance A substantial number (917) of the genes involved in resistance to various metals were detected, many of which showed significantly (P<0.05) increased abundance in plume samples (Supplementary Figure S9). Genes encoding reductases for As (arsC) and Hg (mer), efflux transporters for Cd (cadA), Cu, Co and Zn (czcA and czcD), Cr (ChrA), Cu (copA), Hg (merT), Ag (silC) and Zn (zntA), and the proteins involved in Te resistance (terC, terD and terZ) were more (P<0.05 or 0.01) abundant in the plume samples. Bacteriophages were also significantly stimulated In total, 52 bacterial phage genes associated with host recognition, lysis, replication and structure were observed in all samples. The signal intensities for many of the genes involved in replication were significantly (P<0.05) higher in the plume than in the non-plume samples (Figure 7), supporting the suggestion by Head et al (2006) that bacteriophages could be an important factor for intrinsic bioremediation of HCs. Unfortunately we are unable to provide accessible alternative text for this. If you require assistance to access this image, please contact help@nature.com or the author The normalized signal intensity of the replication genes for bacteriophage. The signal intensity for each sequence was the average of the total signal intensity from all the replicates. Gene number is the protein ID number for each gene as listed in the GenBank database. All data are presented as mean±s.e. ***P<0.01, **P<0.05, *P<0.1. Discussion The Deepwater Horizon oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico was one of the worst environmental disasters in the United State history. The impact of an oil spill of such an unprecedented magnitude and depth on marine ecosystems is largely unknown. Using the GeoChip-based high-throughput microarray technology, we showed that diverse microbial functional groups (a group of genes involved in certain functional processes), including those important to HC degradation, carbon metabolism, methanogenesis, nitrogen assimilation, sulfate reduction, phosphorus release, metal resistance and bacteriophage replication, were more highly represented in the oil plume samples than in non-plume samples from the same depth. Also, the changes in community functional structure were highly correlated to the changes in geochemistry, with oil being the predominant factor shaping the functional composition and structure of the microbial communities. Our results support the phylogeny-based study by Hazen et al (2010) that the deep-sea marine microbial communities underwent a dynamic change in response to the oil spill and associated geochemical changes. Our results are also consistent with previous studies of oil spill and petroleum contamination (Harayama et al, 2004; Head et al, 2006; Bordenave et al, 2007), which showed that microorganisms able to utilize HCs became dominant in oil-contaminated sites. Such functional gene information is useful for assessing the impacts of oil spills and should facilitate the design of appropriate strategies and approaches to deal with petroleum contamination. The clean-up of the deep-sea oil plume will primarily depend on the indigenous microbes present in this environment, as current technology does not allow removing the dispersed oil and gas at such great depths. One of the critical environmental questions is whether microorganisms for degrading various HCs exist in the community and whether they respond to oil spill. Our GeoChip results indicated that many functional genes/populations involved in both aerobic and anaerobic degradation of various oil components are detected and/or enriched in the oil plume, indicating that the indigenous HC-degrading populations are capable of responding to the oil spill. For example, alkB for alkanes, Xamo for alkene, genes bco, ohbAB, GCoADH and pimF for benzoate, genes mdlA, mdlB and mdlC for mandelate, and genes Apc and catB for BTEX metabolic pathway exhibited a significantly (P<0.05) higher abundance in the oil plume than in the non-oil plume. The changes in relative abundance of these genes/populations were significantly correlated with the concentrations of various oil contaminants in the samples (Hazen et al, 2010). 