Anaerobic Degradation of Methyl tert-Butyl Ether (MTBE) and tert-Butyl Alcohol (TBA) Abstract The potential for anaerobic degradation of methyl tert-butyl ether (MTBE) and tert-butyl alcohol (TBA) was investigated in laboratory incubations of sediments from a petroleum-contaminated aquifer and in aquatic sediments. The addition of humic substances (HS) stimulated the anaerobic degradation of MTBE in aquifer sediments in which Fe(III) was available as an electron acceptor. This is attributed to the fact that HS and other extracellular quinones can stimulate the activity of Fe(III)-reducing microorganisms by acting as an electron shuttle between Fe(III)-reducing microorganisms and insoluble Fe(III) oxides. MTBE was not degraded in aquifer sediments without Fe(III) and HS. [14C]-MTBE added to aquatic sediments adapted for anaerobic MTBE degradation was converted to 14CO2 in the presence or absence of HS or the HS analog, anthraquione-2,6-disulfonate. Unamended aquatic sediments produced 14CH4 as well as 14CO2 from [14C]-MTBE. The aquatic sediments also rapidly consumed TBA under anaerobic conditions and converted [14C]-TBA to 14CH4 and 14CO2. An adaptation period of ca. 250−300 days was required prior to the most rapid anaerobic MTBE degradation in both sediment types, whereas TBA was metabolized in the aquatic sediments without a lag. These results demonstrate that, under the appropriate conditions, MTBE and TBA can be degraded in the absence of oxygen. This suggests that it may be possible to design strategies for the anaerobic remediation of MTBE in petroleum-contaminated subsurface environments. Introduction The gasoline additive methyl tert-butyl ether (MTBE) is a ubiquitous groundwater contaminant (1). The U.S. Geological Survey National Water Quality Assessment Program identified MTBE in 27% of urban wells tested (2). A more recent survey indicated that between 5 and 10% of all community drinking water wells nationwide have detectable MTBE contamination (3). MTBE is mobile in the subsurface, in part because it is highly water soluble and does not significantly adsorb to aquifer sediments (4). Although the potential for significant aerobic degradation of MTBE has been observed in incuba tions of aquatic sediments (5), as well as a variety of pure cultures (6-10), there appears to be little intrinsic potential for MTBE degradation in aquifer sediments (11). Thus, plumes of MTBE can be much more extensive than the plumes of other petroleum co-contaminants (11, 12). The persistence of MTBE in petroleum-contaminated aquifers has led to a search for methods for MTBE bioremediation. Two aerobic MTBE-degrading microorganisms have been isolated which can degrade MTBE when introduced into aquifer sediments in laboratory incubations (9, 10). Furthermore, there was a loss of MTBE from an oxygen-supplemented portion of a petroleum-contaminated aquifer that was inoculated with high concentrations of a MTBE-degrading culture (12). It has been suggested that aerobic microorganisms that co-metabolize MTBE when growing on propane or butane might be used for either in situ remediation or to treat MTBE contamination in above-ground bioreactors (6, 7). Studies on aromatic hydrocarbon contaminants have suggested that anaerobic strategies for the in situ bioremediation of petroleum-contaminated subsurface environments may be as preferable as aerobic approaches (13−23). The source zone of petroleum-contaminated aquifers is invariably anaerobic (19). Introducing sufficient oxygen into these source zones can be technically difficult and expensive (14). Anaerobic electron acceptors can be easily added to the subsurface, and they do not react with other compounds present (20). These past studies serve as a basis from which to develop a potential strategy for anaerobic MTBE biodegradation. Fe(III) is frequently the most abundant potential electron acceptor for the anaerobic oxidation of organic contaminants in polluted subsurface environments (19). Previous studies have demonstrated that the anaerobic degradation of aromatic hydrocarbons, including benzene, can be stimulated in the Fe(III)-containing sediments of petroleum-contaminated aquifers with the addition of humic substances (HS). HS are considered to promote the activity of Fe(III)-reducing microorganisms by alleviating the need for direct contact between Fe(III) oxides and Fe(III)-reducing microorganisms (24). 