Contaminated aquifers might be a specific ecological niche for syntrophic benzene degradation, as syntrophs are versatile regarding the terminal electron acceptor and specifically adapted to a life at the thermodynamic limit. At the Zeitz site, anaerobic benzene degradation, likely with sulfate as electron acceptor, has been verified also in the flow path of the benzene plume by compound-specific stable isotope analysis (CSIA) (Fischer et al., 2007; 2009). This method, which is explained in more detail below, has generally great potential to verify anaerobic benzene degradation in contaminated aquifers due to the strong hydrogen isotope fractionation linked to anaerobic benzene degradation. Recently, a sulfate-reducing benzene-degrading culture was enriched from groundwater sampled from an underground gas storage area (Berlendis et al., 2010). The abundant phylotypes in this enrichment culture were distantly related to Pelobacter, Thermotogales and Methanolobus, indicating that benzene is syntrophically degraded. Benzene degradation under iron-reducing conditions Several benzene-mineralizing iron-reducing cultures were successfully established using amorphous iron hydroxide [Fe(OH)3] as electron acceptor (Kazumi et al., 1997; Villatoro-Monzon et al., 2003; Jahn et al., 2005; Botton and Parsons, 2006; Kunapuli et al., 2007). Iron-dependent benzene mineralization could also be stimulated by adding nitriloacetic acid (NTA) or other iron-chelating compounds (Lovley et al., 1994; 1996; Caldwell et al., 1999). Presumably one of the best-investigated aquifers in which iron-driven benzene degradation takes place is the Bemidji site in Minnesota (USA), where a crude oil pipeline ruptured in 1979 and contaminated the adjacent aquifer (Essaid et al., 2011). Benzene degradation or mineralization in anaerobic microcosms prepared with sediment and groundwater from the iron-reducing zone of this aquifer was repeatedly reported (Baedecker et al., 1993; Cozzarelli et al., 1994; Anderson et al., 1998). Recently, benzene degradation was also verified directly in the anoxic iron-reducing zone of the plume by an in situ microcosms approach (Cozzarelli et al., 2010). Rooney-Varga and colleagues (1999) investigated the community structure of iron-reducing benzene-mineralizing enrichment cultures and sediment samples of the Bemidji site. MPN-PCR revealed an increase of Geobacter-related 16S rRNA gene copies in benzene-mineralizing sediments and enrichment cultures, indicating an involvement of Geobacteraceae in benzene mineralization under iron-reducing conditions. Geobacteraceae were also dominant in iron-reducing benzene-degrading enrichment cultures set up from a landfill site in the Netherlands (Botton and Parsons, 2007). In contrast, no Geobacteraceae were identified in a highly enriched iron-reducing culture originating from a contaminated site in Poland (Kunapuli et al., 2007; Laban et al., 2010). Here, a phylotype affiliated to the Peptococcaceae was most abundant and assimilated 13C-benzene in a DNA-SIP experiment (Kunapuli et al., 2007). Phylotypes affiliated to the Desulfobulbaceae and members of the Actinobacteria were also prominent. The authors suggested that benzene is syntrophically mineralized in this culture, with the Peptococcaceae phylotype as the primary benzene oxidizer. Benzene degradation under nitrate-reducing conditions Major and colleagues (1988) demonstrated first benzene degradation dependent on nitrate as electron acceptor, using microcosms set up from hydrocarbon-contaminated sediments and anoxic groundwater. Nitrate was shown to be reduced to dinitrogen during benzene degradation; the electron balance of reduced nitrate and degraded benzene indicated that benzene was mineralized, although carbon dioxide production from benzene was not experimentally confirmed. Benzene degradation under nitrate-reducing conditions was later observed in microcosms made of soil and anoxic groundwater taken from three different sites (Nales et al., 1998). Afterwards, stable benzene-degrading enrichment cultures were established and further examined. As demonstrated for one culture in experiments with 14C-labelled benzene, more than 90% of the benzene's carbon was released as CO2; benzene degradation appeared to be coupled to nitrate reduction to nitrite (Burland and Edwards, 1999). Notably, the biomass yield of the nitrate-reducing cultures was in the range observed for sulfate-reducing or methanogenic benzene-degrading enrichments (Ulrich and Edwards, 2003), despite the high redox potential of the nitrate/nitrite couple (Table 2). Dominant phylotypes in the cultures, determined after being incubated for several years in the laboratory, belonged to the Betaproteobacteria (genera Azoarcus and Dechloromonas), the Peptococcaceae (genus Pelotomaculum) and Chlorobi (Ulrich and Edwards, 2003; Mancini et al., 2008). Analogously to cultures enriched with ferric iron, sulfate or carbon dioxide as electron acceptor, it was apparently not possible to isolate a single benzene degrader out of these cultures, despite the long laboratory incubation time. Benzene degradation with electron acceptors other than nitrate, sulfate, ferric iron or carbon dioxide Manganese(IV) was shown to be used as electron acceptor for anaerobic benzene degradation in sediment microcosms and columns. The benzene degradation rates were significantly higher for manganese(IV) compared with ferric iron, indicating that this process is relevant in the environment (Villatoro-Monzon et al., 2003; 2008). Recently, Zhang and colleagues (2010) showed that benzene was mineralized by sediment microorganisms using a graphite anode as electron acceptor. Pure cultures of anaerobic benzene degraders Notably, the only pure cultures described to mineralize benzene using nitrate as electron acceptor were not isolated by the ‘classical approach’ from benzene-degrading enrichment cultures. 