Gene-targeted-metagenomics reveals extensive diversity of aromatic dioxygenase genes in the environment Understanding the relationship between gene diversity and function for important environmental processes is a major ecological research goal. We applied gene-targeted metagenomics and pyrosequencing to aromatic dioxygenase genes to obtain greater sequence depth than possible by other methods. A polymerase chain reaction (PCR) primer set designed to target a 524-bp region that confers substrate specificity of biphenyl dioxygenases yielded 2000 and 604 sequences from the 5′ and 3′ ends of PCR products, respectively, which passed our validity criteria. Sequence alignment showed three known conserved residues, as well as another seven conserved residues not reported earlier. Of the valid sequences, 95% and 41% were assigned to 22 and 3 novel clusters in that they did not include any earlier reported sequences at 0.6 distance by complete linkage clustering for sequenced regions. The greater diversity revealed by this gene-targeted approach provides deeper insights into genes potentially important in environmental processes to better understand their ecology, functional differences and evolutionary origins. We also provide criteria for primer design for this approach, as well as guidance for data processing of diverse functional genes, as gene databases for most genes of environmental relevance are limited. Metagenomics circumvents the problem of unculturability and has the potential to understand microbial communities at their aggregate level, transcending the individual organism to focus on the genes in a community (National Research Council, 2007). Because of the extensive genetic diversity of most microbial communities, it is currently impossible to obtain enough sequence depth to sample any gene with sufficient coverage to draw meaningful conclusions with regard to its diversity or population characteristics. This is particularly important in cases in which functional screens are problematic because of expression requirements, such as for protein complexes. To overcome this limitation, approaches are needed to target sequencing capacity to genes of particular interest. One approach is to use polymerase chain reaction (PCR)-based targeting, together with pyrosequencing technology, similar to the manner in which it is currently carried out for 16S rRNA gene sequencing (Sogin et al., 2006; Huber et al., 2007). This approach, which we term gene-targeted metagenomics (GT-metagenomics), should then provide more extensive insight into the diversity that nature has produced, as well as provide sequence information for probes to use in recovering the entire gene from clades of interest. As many studies have shown that the mutation of a few amino acids can critically affect the structure of individual enzymes, changing their substrate utilization and degradation activities (Parales et al., 2000; Suenaga et al., 2002; Bagnéris et al., 2005; Vardar and Wood, 2005), understanding gene diversity in nature can reveal the functional, ecological and evolutionary patterns of key genes. The GT-metagenomics approach requires that the targeted gene has sufficiently conserved regions of appropriate distance for emulsion PCR, which is required for pyrosequencing, so that primers or sets of primers will sufficiently cover a gene family. This approach is likely to be most useful for genes directly responsible for important ecosystem functions or ecological processes, such as biogeochemical cycles, biodegradation, pathogenesis, antibiotic resistances and cell signaling. We tested this approach on a set of dioxygenase genes important in carbon cycle for the turnover of more recalcitrant organic carbon, as well as for pollutant degradation. We also discuss requirements for primer design for GT-metagenomics and the subsequent data analysis. Our results show a much greater diversity of genes potentially important in nature's carbon cycle than realized earlier. Top of page Materials and methods Sample soil and DNA extraction Polychlorinated biphenyl (PCB)-contaminated soil (15 mg kg−1) was collected from the root zone of an Austrian pine (Pinus nigra) tree at the grounds of a paint production plant in the Czech Republic that was shown earlier to have significantly higher numbers of PCB degraders (Leigh et al., 2006). DNA was extracted as described earlier (Leigh et al., 2007) and stored at −20 °C until use. Primer design Gibson and Parales (2000) classified Rieske nonheme iron dioxygenase genes into four families: toluene/biphenyl, naphthalene, benzoate and phthalate. The Functional Gene Pipeline/Repository (FGPR) (http://fungene.cme.msu.edu/) provided the database of the sets of genes that belong to those families on the basis of monthly Hidden Markov Model (Durbin et al., 1998) searches of the DDBJ/EMBL/GenBank non-redundant protein database (nr). Nucleotide and protein sequences of the toluene/biphenyl family of dioxygenase genes were retrieved from the FGPR bph v3.1 database (July 2007) with a cutoff score >900 and size >400 bp. The 40 retrieved protein sequences with 35 different nucleotide sequences were aligned using ClustalW (Thompson et al., 1994). A PCR primer set was designed from the conserved regions of these sequences: BPHD-f3, 5′-AACTGGAARTTYGCIGCVGA-3′; BPHD-r1, 5′-ACCCAGTTYTCICCRTCGTC-3′. The specificity of the primer set was tested by comparison with the DDBJ/EMBL/GenBank database. Pyrosequencing PCR primers with sequencing adapter A (5′-GCCTCCCTCGCGCCATCAG-3′) or B (5′-GCCTTGCCAGCCCGCTCAG-3′) at the 5′ end of BPHD-f3 or BPHD-r1 were synthesized and purified by dual HPLC (Integrated DNA Technologies, Coralville, IA, USA). The PCR mixture was prepared in a total volume of 20 μl, containing 1 X FastStart High Fidelity Reaction Buffer (Roche Diagnostics, Basel, Switzerland), 1.25 μM of each primer, 150 ng μl−1 of bovine serum albumin (New England BioLabs, Ipswich, MA, USA), 0.2 mM of dNTPs, 0.5 μl (2.5 U) of FastStart High Fidelity PCR System Enzyme Blend (Roche Diagnostics) and 4 ng of template DNA. 