The specificity of the primer set was tested by comparison with the DDBJ/EMBL/GenBank database. Pyrosequencing PCR primers with sequencing adapter A (5′-GCCTCCCTCGCGCCATCAG-3′) or B (5′-GCCTTGCCAGCCCGCTCAG-3′) at the 5′ end of BPHD-f3 or BPHD-r1 were synthesized and purified by dual HPLC (Integrated DNA Technologies, Coralville, IA, USA). The PCR mixture was prepared in a total volume of 20 μl, containing 1 X FastStart High Fidelity Reaction Buffer (Roche Diagnostics, Basel, Switzerland), 1.25 μM of each primer, 150 ng μl−1 of bovine serum albumin (New England BioLabs, Ipswich, MA, USA), 0.2 mM of dNTPs, 0.5 μl (2.5 U) of FastStart High Fidelity PCR System Enzyme Blend (Roche Diagnostics) and 4 ng of template DNA. The PCR condition was optimized using the genomic DNA of Burkholderia xenovorans LB400, which carries one of the target dioxygenase genes. Amplifications were performed as follows: 3 min at 95 °C, followed by 30 cycles of 45 s at 95 °C, 45 s at 60 °C and 40 s at 72 °C, then final extension for 4 min at 72 °C. PCR products with primer pairs A-BPHD-f3 and B-BPHD-r1 or B-BPHD-f3 and A-BPHD-r1 were sequenced from 5′ and 3′ ends, respectively. Triplicate PCR products with predicted 542 bp fragments were purified using a QIAquick Gel Extraction Kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany) then with a QIAquick PCR Purification Kit (Qiagen). DNA concentration was determined using a NanoDrop ND-1000 spectrophotometer (NanoDrop Technologies, Wilmington, DE, USA). Purified PCR products were mixed together with other bar-coded samples and subjected to pyrosequencing using the Genome Sequencer FLX System (454 Life Sciences, Branford, CT, USA). Determination of valid sequences Sequences were first trimmed of the primer region and low-quality sequences were removed as follows: We plotted the number of sequences against the first position of an ambiguous base call or stop codon. We determined the length for analysis to be at the position where the plotted curve dropped sharply (175 bp for BPHD-f3 sequences and 200 bp for BPHD-r1 sequences). To remove possible frameshift errors, each sequence was used as a BLASTX query against a BLAST database of the translated library using a 0.001 E-value cutoff to determine the top 10 closest matches. Those reads with the greatest number of hits that include any out-of-frame segments were successively discarded (as both query and subject), until all out-of-frame results were removed. Only the sequences that passed this filter were used for further data analysis and are termed as obtained sequences. Conservation analysis A total of 467 reference sequences, which have both the Rieske family domain (Pfam PF00355) and the Ring_hydroxyl_A family domain (Pfam PF00848), were retrieved from the Pfam protein family database (Finn et al., 2008). Deduced amino-acid sequences from our obtained sequences were aligned using MUSCLE (Edgar, 2004), together with the corresponding region of the reference protein sequences. Gap-treated Shannon entropy (H′) (Zhang et al., 2007) at each alignment position was calculated as: Unfortunately we are unable to provide accessible alternative text for this. If you require assistance to access this image, please contact help@nature.com or the author where fi,a is the relative frequency of amino acid a at the alignment position i. fi,gap represents the number of gaps at the alignment position i divided by the number of alignment sequences. Distance calculation and clustering Dissimilarity matrices were calculated from the individual pairwise alignments of amino-acid sequences using MUSCLE with the default setting. Each value in the matrix is the fraction of the number of positions with dissimilar amino acids out of the total number of alignment positions compared, excluding end gaps. Dissimilar amino acid pairs were those for which negative probability values were assigned in BLOSUM62. These matrices were fed to DOTUR (Schloss and Handelsman, 2005) for complete linkage clustering. Nucleotide sequence accession numbers The nucleotide sequences described in this study have been submitted to the European Read Archive under the accession number of ERA000082. Top of page Results Primer design The BPHD-f3 and BPHD-r1 primer set, corresponding to 219N–225E and 387D–393V of bphA1 from B. xenovorans LB400, respectively, was designed to amplify 524 bp PCR products. It includes a portion of the C-terminal domain of the large oxygenase subunit that is highly diverse and has many residues responsible for congener selectivity of PCBs (Vézina et al., 2008), including four regions identified by Mondello et al. (1997). With this primer set, theoretically 31 genes out of 49 genes from bph v4.9 (FGPR, January 2009), with a cutoff score >900 and size >400 bp, can be amplified and no nondioxygenase genes can be amplified using BLAST search against the DDBJ/EMBL/GenBank database. When we tried to amplify the remaining 18 genes by increasing the degeneracy of the primer set, several weak nontarget bands were observed on agarose gels, which might produce nontarget sequences by pyrosequencing (see also Discussion). These results indicated high specificity and sufficient coverage by the designed primer set. 