As Raman microscopy detects stable-isotope incorporation into cellular constituents, this would offer a possible advantage over FISH-MAR by obviating the need to handle radioisotopes and facilitates the somewhat cumbersome quantification of silver grains. Furthermore and in contrast to FISH-MAR, Raman provides information into which cellular compounds the labelled substrate was incorporated. Recently, FISH and Raman confocal microscopy have been directly combined to confirm the involvement of Pseudomonas spp. in the assimilation of 13C10-naphthalene in groundwater (Huang et al, 2007). Stable-isotope mass spectrometry Multi-isotope imaging mass spectrometry (or nanoSIMS) is conceptually similar to the approach of Raman confocal microscopy. It improves upon the earlier secondary ion mass spectrometry (SIMS) technology, which was originally coupled with FISH (Orphan et al, 2001), but at only low resolution (approx10–15 mum). The nanoSIMS technology analyses the stable- or radioactive-isotope content of single cells at a resolution (50 nm) that exceeds a Raman microscope, possesses sensitivity in cellular 14C detection that exceeds MAR by 1000 times , has a stable-isotope measurement precision of plusminus1%, and a price (>£1 300 000) to match its impressive performance (Kuypers and Jørgensen, 2007). As already achieved for Raman-FISH, a combination of FISH-nanoSIMS would enable phylogenetic and isotopic analysis of an environmental sample in a single scan. Furthermore, it might even become possible to couple isotope array experiments, performed after the addition of stable-isotope labelled substrates, with nanoSIMS. Such an exciting combination would provide high-throughput, stable-isotope-based analysis of microbial communities and their functions. Owing to the high spatial resolution of nanoSIMS, these analyses could possibly be performed in a massively parallel manner with high-density arrays. Microbial ecologists will need patience for nanoSIMS instruments to become commonplace and affordable, but with unparalleled versatility, quantification and sensitivity (Lechene et al, 2006), the potential looms large. Top of page Conclusions Isotope-based techniques have become firmly established in international microbial ecology research. Their relative ease-of-use and unparalleled ability to link the structure and function of uncultivated organisms enables long unanswered questions to be addressed with creative experimentation. As discovery science becomes increasingly complemented with hypothesis-driven research, we anticipate learning vastly more about who eats what, where and when. Microbial communities are foundational to almost all aspects of nutrient cycling in the natural environment. Learning more about the metabolic contributions of bacteria, Archaea and microbial Eukarya will shed increasingly more light on their behaviour as single cells, populations and communities. As microbial ecologists focus on issues of global importance, we anticipate that isotopic techniques can and will continue to catalyse good science and innovative research. 