Non-methane alkanes Since the 1940s, the possibility of an anaerobic oxidation of alkanes of various chain lengths has been repeatedly examined to understand the geochemically important and economically undesirable process of bacterial sulphate reduction in oil reservoirs and during oil production. Alkanes, as major oil constituents, were regarded as potential electron donors and carbon sources for SRB. In addition, possible anaerobic reactions of alkanes were studied in connection with biochemical investigations of aerobic alkane-utilizing microorganisms. Before the monooxygenase reaction was generally accepted as the initial step of aerobic alkane degradation, an oxygen-independent dehydrogenation to 1-alkenes with subsequent epoxidation or hydration of the double bond was suggested as an alternative mechanism; the latter reaction sequence would, theoretically, offer the possibility for anaerobic alkane utilization. Later, however, anaerobic growth of the formerly investigated species and anaerobic alkane dehydrogenation could not be repeated or was viewed critically. The anaerobic degradation of alkanes with sulphate or nitrate was first demonstrated by the quantitative measurement of substrate consumption with novel isolates that differed from any known species. Furthermore, alkane degradation by methanogenic communities was also show ;. Overall equations for the anaerobic degradation of n-hexadecane—a frequently studied alkane—are shown below (free-energy changes given for liquid n-hexadecane, pH7, anion activities of 10−2 and standard pressure of gases). Fatty acid analysis in two SRB led to the assumption that anaerobic alkane activation occurs by the addition of a carbon compound (a C1 compound in one initial hypothesis), and that the site in the alkane chain for such addition may not be the same in different species [44]. The reaction of C addition was further supported by labelling studies showing that the methyl group in branched fatty acids formed upon growth with n-alkanes originated from the terminal carbon of the substrate. In a denitrifying bacterium with the capacity for alkane degradation, one of the proteins that was specifically formed during growth on n-hexane exhibited N-terminal sequence similarity with the small subunit (BssC) of the anaerobic toluene-activating enzyme (see below) found in denitrifying bacteria (A Behrends, P Ehrenreich, J Heider, T Hurek, S Ratering, FWiddel unpublished results). These results suggested that alkane activation might have a similar mechanism to that of toluene activation, which involves fumarate and yields the substituted succinate, benzylsuccinate. Indeed, substituted succinates with alkane-derived alkyl chains were detected in a sulphate-reducing enrichment culture and a denitrifying strain growing with n-dodecane or n-hexane, respectively. The inclusion of authentic standards and labelling studies clearly indicated that n-hexane was activated at carbon-2 in connection with an addition to fumarate, yielding (1-methylpentyl)succinate ( Fig. 6a); the additional formation of some (1-ethylbutyl)succinate indicated a by-reaction of the alkane at carbon-3. Interestingly, the alkylsuccinates occurred as two diastereomers. The formation of stereoisomers is exceptional among enzymatic reactions. Assuming that the reaction with fumarate is stereoselective, as in toluene activation (see below), the formation of the stereoisomers may be due to relaxed stereospecificity at the alkane carbon; this suggests that the diastereomers are nonracemic. Furthermore electron-paramagnetic resonance (EPR) spectroscopy showed the presence of an organic radical, possibly a glycyl radical, in n-hexane-grown cells but not in n-hexanoate-grown cells. This further supports the idea that alkane activation resembles, in principle, anaerobic toluene activation which most likely involves a glycyl radical (see below). A unifying mechanistic scheme is depicted in Fig. 7. The energy to be overcome during activation of an alkane at the secondary carbon atom is 33kJmol–1 higher than in the case of toluene (Fig. 8); for a hypothetical alkane activation at the primary carbon atom the difference is even higher, 49kJmol–1. The overall reaction of hydrocarbon addition to fumarate is exergonic (see also Conclusions). The biochemistry of the further degradation of alkylsuccinates has not been elucidated, but is expected to lead to fatty acid metabolism 44. ;. If different alkylsuccinates are further degraded by analogous mechanisms, the fatty acids derived from alkanes activated at carbon-2 should differ by one carbon atom from fatty acids derived from alkanes activated at carbon-3 (the activation energy would be rather similar). Hence, different fatty acid profiles in some SRB grown on the same alkane may result from different sites of initial attack 44. ;. The only other comparable anaerobic activation re-action is that used for the synthesis of diabolic acid (15,16-dimethyltriacontanedioic acid), a component of the lipid fraction in Butyrivibrio fibriosolvens. 