The bootstrapped neighbor-joining phylogenetic tree was generated in MEGA using the maximum composite likelihood model with gamma-distributed rates and pairwise deletion (39). SSU rRNA sequences from oil-degrading isolates, similar environmental OTU from the pyrosequencing data set, and top isolated BLAST hits were aligned by using the GreenGenes NAST aligner (16). Nodes with >70% bootstrapping support, out of 500 replications, are shown. View this table: In this window In a new window TABLE 5. Summary of taxa detected in the highest relative abundance in DNA-derived and RNA-derived pyrosequence libraries from beach sands in this studya Phenotypic characterization of oil-degrading bacteria.Pure cultures from 5 of the 14 genera (SSU rRNA gene sequences show high sequence identity to those from Alcanivorax dieselolei, Acinetobacter sp., Pseudidiomarina maritima, Marinobacter hydrocarbonoclasticus, and Vibrio hepatarius) were tested for oil consumption under aerobic conditions. Oil degradation capability was confirmed from the quantification of residual oil and concomitant growth as optical density and cell protein (see the supplemental material). Little to no oil was consumed by the Vibrio strain in comparison to killed control cultures and minimal growth was observed. In contrast, all of the remaining strains were capable of rapid aerobic growth with source oil as the sole carbon substrate and electron donor. Gravimetric analysis indicated that strains most similar to A. dieselolei and by Acinetobacter sp. showed the highest oil degradation potential, with 93 and 90% of the chloroform-extractable portion of amended crude oil degraded, respectively, compared to autoclaved and uninoculated control cultures (see Fig. S1 in the supplemental material). The strains most similar to M. hydrocarbonoclasticus and P. maritima showed moderate amounts of oil degradation, with 36 and 12% of the chloroform-extractable oil fraction removed, respectively. The results from culture experiments in which oil consumption was quantified by spectrophotometry confirmed the above-mentioned results from gravimetric analysis (see Fig. S2 in the supplemental material). Initial physiological characterization was conducted for five of our isolates (SSU rRNA gene sequences most similar to those from A. dieselolei, Acinetobacter sp., M. hydrocarbonclasticus, P. maritima, and V. hepatarius) using phenotypic MicroArray (PM) analysis. PM testing included salt tolerance, a wide variety of carbon sources (alcohols, amines, amino acids, carbohydrates, carboxylic acids, esters, fatty acids, and polymers), and inorganic and organic forms of major nutrients (N, P, and S) (see Table S2 in the supplemental material). Consistent with their marine habitat, all strains metabolized in the presence of NaCl concentrations up to 10%. In addition, Tween (polyoxyethylene sorbate) compounds, which contain long-chain alkyl moieties, were metabolized by all strains tested. Utilization of Tween compounds is considered diagnostic of the substrate specificity of marine bacteria toward the use of hydrocarbons as a source of carbon and energy (76). However, contrasts were observed in phenotype between oil-degrading strains that indicate niche specialization in carbon and major nutrient metabolism (see the supplemental material for details). Vibrio, Acinetobacter, and Marinobacter strains all utilized a fairly broad range of carbon substrates. In contrast, the Alcanivorax strain utilized relatively few carbon sources among those tested. Cultivation-independent analysis of bacterial community structure in beach sands.Bacterial community structure was initially assessed in DNA extracts of 178 samples from three field trips by community fingerprinting using the automated ribosomal intergenic spacer analysis (ARISA) method (see the supplemental material for details). Twenty-six samples were chosen for pyrotag sequencing of SSU rRNA amplicons to represent substantial shifts in bacterial community structure. Pyrosequence data were analyzed using a nonmetric multidimensional scaling plot (NMDS) of an averaged Bray-Curtis distance matrix (Fig. 4). The distances reveal a pronounced, uniform response to oil contamination in the total and active bacterial communities. The pattern of sample grouping in ordination space reveals community response to oil presence, with the most heavily oiled samples (dark shading) distinct from clean samples (light shading). The pristine or “clean” samples group together and are most distant to the oiled samples. 