Several Geobacteraceae bands such as Geo-83 and Geo125 (which was almost identical to Geo-83) had much higher intensity at site IR-3 than at site IR-1 or IR-2, and these bands were not detected in sediments from the uncontaminated or methanogenic sites. Geo-83 and the closely related sequences represent a distinct group in the Geobacter cluster within the family Geobacteraceae (Fig. 5). A more detailed evaluation of the diversity of Geobacteraceae with primers specific for this reducing sites, albeit with lower band intensities (Fig. 3), indicating that its presence is not unique to the benzene-oxidizing site, IR-3. However, a sequence closely related to V. parodoxus was recovered from the benzene-oxidizing, Fe(III)-reducing enrichment culture along with a Geobacter sequence and a Geothrix sequence. Thus, the possibility that an organism(s) closely related to V. parodoxus is involved in anaerobic benzene degradation cannot be eliminated. Similarly, it is possible that anaerobic benzene degradation is carried out by a microbial consortium that includes Geobacter sp., Geothrix sp., and a relative of V. parodoxus, all of which were detected in both the benzene-oxidizing sediments and the enrichment. In summary, although comparative analysis of 16S rDNA sequences does not allow definitive determination of which microorganisms are responsible for a specific metabolism in the environment, the results suggest that specific Geobacter spp. are associated with the capacity for benzene degradation in this petroleum-contaminated aquifer. Evidence supporting this conclusion includes (i) the significant increase in Geobacteraceae within the zone of benzene degradation; (ii) specific enrichment of a tight phylogenetic cluster of Geobacter spp. in the zone of benzene degradation that is not found in the uncontaminated sediments; (iii) the fact that the genus Geobacter contains organisms known to be able to oxidize aromatic compounds with the reduction of Fe(III); and (iv) the finding that Geobacter spp. were dominant organisms in a benzene-oxidizing, Fe(III)-reducing enrichment culture established with benzene-degrading sediments from this aquifer. This is an important finding because, to date, the specific enrichment of Geobacter spp. is the only variable which has been found to be associated with the capacity for anaerobic benzene degradation at this site. A variety of other geochemical parameters were not predictive of the potential for benzene degradation (5). Thus, these results demonstrate that phylogenetic studies of contaminated aquifer sediments can yield insights into the microorganisms associated with contaminant degradation and raise the possibility that phylogenetic analyses will be useful for predicting the potential for anaerobic benzene degradation at other sites. 