Values ranged from 73–75% of expected for denitrifying cultures, and 88–186% for sulfidogenic. Because of the small amount of substrate utilized (from 6–21 µmol) and the large background loss in some cultures, it is difficult to obtain good estimates for these values. They are, however, in general agreement with the hypothesis that the BTEX is being mineralized rather than lost by some other process. The presence of methane in the headspace of the methanogenic enrichments, including OL site water (data not shown), indicated that methanogenesis was the terminal electron accepting process in these cultures. Iron reduction was not measured. Effects of gasoline When commercial gasoline was used as the substrate, degradation of BTEX was much slower and less complete than when the BTEX was added alone (Figure 2). BTEX fed cultures showed complete loss of all six compounds in less than 150 days. In contrast, gasoline fed cultures showed only partial loss of toluene and the three xylenes, and no loss of benzene or ethylbenzene after nearly 300 days. In order to determine which components of gasoline were causing the inhibitory effect we established enrichments containing toluene alone, BTEX, toluene plus a mixture of C5-C11 alkanes, or gasoline, and following the degradation of the toluene over time. The concentration of toluene in each was approximately equal. Results are shown in Figure 3. Complete loss of toluene was observed within 28 days in the toluene alone cultures, 42 days in BTEX cultures and 70 days in toluene plus alkanes. Degradation was not significant. Although previous research has demonstrated that individual BTEX compounds are biodegradable under anaerobic conditions, few investigators have studied the differences between sites, or the effect that different electron acceptors have on degradation. This study is significant because we have tested the activity from several sites in a side-by-side comparison using the full range of BTEX components as substrates. Enrichment conditions were identical except These individual values were then summed to find the expected nitrate or sulfate loss, which was compared to the actual net loss in the active cultures. for the inoculum and the electron acceptor provided. This allows us to draw conclusions about the nature of the microbial populations present and the potential for bioremediation. We have shown that there is a great deal of variability in the fate of BTEX in anaerobic sediments, with the rate and extent of loss depending on the inoculum used and the terminal electron acceptor available. While some enrichments resulted in complete loss of all six compounds (e.g. AK-sulfidogenic), others showed no activity at all (e.g. BML – all conditions). Within each sediment, the activity was affected by which electron acceptor was provided. Marine cultures had robust activity under sulfidogenic conditions, while only freshwater cultures were effective under methanogenic. Both sets responded well to nitrate addition, with rapid degradation of some compounds. Furthermore, the degradation of BTEX was severely limited by the presence of some, as yet unidentified, compound or compounds in gasoline. This information has duplications for the type of remediation strategy to be used on BTEX spills in a specific area depending on the type of material spilled, the pollution history, and the sediment characteristics. Hydrocarbon utilization was extensive in cultures from the organic rich, polluted sites (AK and OL), and very slight or lacking in the low carbon, pristine sites (TKT and BML). Toluene in particular was quickly degraded in cultures from both of the polluted sites, under all reducing conditions tested (with the exception of methanogenic cultures derived from AK) (Table 1). 