The objective of this study was to evaluate gasoline biodegradation in batch soil microcosms. Microorganisms able to grow in the presence of gasoline were isolated from soil. Several treatment systems were performed using both isolated strains and Pseudomonas putida obtained from a culture collection. The treatment system using only autochthonous microflora (system 1) presented an average value of degradation of 50%. The association of Pseudomonas putida, Burkholderia cepacia, Pseudomonas alcaligenes and the native soil microflora (system 13) presented significant percentage of removal of n-undecane (88.7), n-dodecane (61.3) and n-tridecane (66.7). According to these results, systems 1 and 13 revealed considerable potential for application in bioremediation treatments. The contamination of soil and aquifer systems by gasoline hydrocarbons as a consequence of accidental spillage can cause serious environmental problems. The major gasoline constituents (benzene, toluene and xylene - BTX) are relatively soluble in water and are considered human carcinogens. Thus, the level of BTX in water must be highly controlled and limited to low values (6,16). Several methods can be employed to remove gasoline from soil and groundwater including air-sparging, soil vapour extraction, "pump and treat" and bioremediation. There is no general rule to choose the best treatment for contaminated sites. Each case must be analyzed individually, evaluating its particularities. Physical treatments separate soil and contaminants without destroying or chemically modifying them but have many limitations, such as high cost (10). A great amount of hydrocarbons becomes sorbed in soil matrix (approximately 50%) decreasing the removal efficiency (7). Biological process, on the other hand, is a promising technology for clean-up these contaminants mainly due to its simplicity and cost-effectiveness as compared to the other alternatives (2). Bioremediation can be considered as a new technology to treat contaminated sites by the use of biological agents able to modify or decompose target pollutants. It can use the action or/and addition of indigenous microorganisms, exogenous microorganisms from other sites, or genetically modified organisms (13). The maximum benefit of this process is the mineralization of the pollutant, leading ultimately to the formation of CO2, H2O and biomass (15). In biological treatments it is necessary to perform laboratory feasibility tests to determine the microbial potential to degrade the pollutants and whether nutrients are required to increase the degradation rate (3). The objective of this work was to evaluate the biodegradation of gasoline in several treatment systems constituted of unsterilized soil inoculated or not with different bacterial cultures. The gasoline used in all experiments was obtained from PETROBRÁS (Petróleo Brasileiro S. A) gas station (Rio de Janeiro, Brazil). Brazilian gasoline contains 22% of ethanol and its characteristics, under the described test conditions, were preserved and confirmed by regular chromatographic analysis. The soil was obtained from a site free of gasoline contamination in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. Soil samples were collected from different sites to a depth of 30 cm by hand digging. The amount of soil was sufficient to store for a maximum period of a month because more than 30 days are generally unsuitable for use in biodegradation studies (12). The soil was mixed thoroughly, sieved through screens with 2 mm diameter openings to remove stones, rot materials and other debris and stored in a sterile polyethylene flask (2-liter capacity) at 10oC in order to reduce moisture losses (12). The water holding capacity was evaluated as suggested by Watwood and White. (18). Table 1 summarizes the soil characteristics performed by CNPS (Centro de Pesquisas de Solos)/ EMBRAPA (Empresa Brasileira de Pesquisa Agropecuária). 