The bacterial cultures utilized in this study were Pseudomonas putida (ATCC 12633), obtained from culture collection, and three species, isolated from soil in the presence of gasoline, identified as Burkholderia cepacia, Pseudomonas alcaligenes and Klebsiella pneumoniae. All microorganisms were maintained on 10 ml slopes of nutrient agar (storage culture) at 4oC and regularly subcultured and monitored for purity. Before introduction into the microcosms, the inoculum was prepared using bacterial cells transferred from the storage culture to a test tube containing 10 ml of nutrient broth. After incubation at 30oC for 14 h, the inoculum was propagated to a 500 ml flask containing 100 ml of the same medium, and also incubated with shaking (150 rpm) to mid-log phase at 30oC. According to dry weight curve plotted for all species, the inoculum volume was calculated to obtain approximately 106 cells per gram of soil. All bacterial cells used were grown separately. A 5 g sample of soil was added to a 500 ml flask containing 100 ml of a mineral medium (pH 7) consisting in g.L-1 : NaCl 5, K2HPO4 1, NH4H2PO4 1, (NH4)2SO4 1, MgSO4.7H2O 0.2 and KNO3 3 and supplemented with 1% (v/w) of gasoline (17). An aliquot (1% v/v) was transferred every three days to fresh medium to ensure growth on the hydrocarbon source. Medium was incubated at 30oC in a rotary shaker (150 rpm). After twelve days, plates containing nutrient agar were seeded. The gasoline was added to the inner surface of the Petri dishes cover with sterile filter disk according to Ridgway et al. (14), Vecchioli et al. (17) and Karlson and Frankenberger (9). Plates were incubated at 30oC for seven days and examined at intervals for colony formation. The biodegradation tests were carried out in 50 ml vials containing 5 g of fresh soil (unsterilized soil). NH4NO3 (30 µmol. g -1soil) was used as nitrogen source. The oxygen levels were maintained by adding hydrogen peroxide to a concentration of 0.1 mM (5). Several treatment systems were tested (Table 2), using inoculum obtained from the culture collection and the strains isolated from soil, individually or in a group, as well as the autochthonous microflora present in the soil. Each bacterial inoculum was added to microcosm in the concentration of approximately 106 cells/ g of soil (treatment systems 2 to 16) except in the treatment system 1 (consisted only of the native soil microflora), not considering the organisms already present in the soil. The initial viable number of cells was measured by the pour plate method both in sterile soil and in unsterilized soil. The water content of the soil was adjusted to 100% of its water holding capacity, considering the inoculum volume and nutrients added. Gasoline was added to give a concentration of 5% (v/w). All vials were crimp sealed with rubber caps and aluminum seals and incubated for 72 h at 30ºC. Control systems were prepared with sterile soil and incubated under the same conditions to assure quantification of biodegradation. The biodegradation percentile was calculated in relation to the non inoculated control system. The treatment sets were performed in triplicate. Viable cell counts were performed at 0 h and 72 h by the pour plate method using nutrient agar. The number of colonies was counted after 24 h of incubation at 30ºC. 