With As, Cd, Cu, and Hg, 71, 71, 72, and 63 substrates, respectively, were no longer used. Only with Hg were nine substrates newly utilizable. The corresponding control showed a loss of ability to metabolize 49 substrates and an addition of 23 new substrates. In the cadmium- and copper-treated samples, the AWCD reached mean values of less than 0.05 absorbance units and produced the largest distance to the control sample (US initial, Figure 5). The decrease in substrate richness and metabolic activity of the pristine control sample was probably due to exhaustion of nutrients after the long incubation time (Figure 6). Population Changes during a ShortTerm Incubation of Soil with Hydrocarbons and Heavy Metals in an Artificially Aerated System It is well known that mineralization of hydrocarbons is strongly stimulated under oxic conditions. The simple aeration system used in these experiments simulates in situ remediation techniques such as air venting. Soil contaminated with diesel oil or phenanthrene (l % of dwt each) was additionally spiked with copper or ar- Carbon source utilization profiles were analyzed after three weeks (Figure 7). In PCA of the carbon source utilization, the first covariance PC axis accounted for 78%, and the second axis accounted for 7% of the variation in the data. PC axis 1 had the highest correlations to the substrates i.-aspartic acid, glucose-6-phosphate, glucose-I-phosphate, and su-senic (0.1 % of dwt each) and the hydrocarbons quantified during a 3-week incubation. The phenanthrene content dropped to 10% of the starting value in the static system due to microbial activity (Figure 6). Aeration did not stimulate the degradation rate, indicating that a factor other than the diffusion of oxygen was rate limiting. As expected, the addition of copper or arsenic resulted in a significant inhibition of phenanthrene degradation. In diesel oil-contaminated soil, the amount of total hydrocarbons decreased to 40% of the original value, independent of the use of the aeration system, indicating that hydrocarbon degradation. These were the substrates for which consistent differences were observed in the degree of substrate utilization between the communities. The second PC axis was highly correlated to the oxidation of inosine, D-galactonic acid lactone, D-galactose, cellobiose, glucose-l-phosphate, r-arabinose, maltose, and gentiobiose. Although the degradation rate for diesel was similar, parallel samples (one aerated and the other not) differed significantly in community analysis. Thus, forced aeration changed the soil community composition much more than the rate of diesel degradation. The largest shifts in the substrate utilization pattern were observed in samples contaminated with heavy metals. These samples also showed the lowest substrate richness and overall activity. Cu and As addition resulted in a loss of ability to degrade 20 to 25 substrates and hardly a gain of new ones. Again, the ability to degrade polymers and carbohydrates was mainly altered by the presence of copper or arsenic. The number of colony-forming units indicated that heavy metal-adapted microbial populations were still highly capable of growing on a complex medium such as R2A. The colonies were smaller, but their number had increased strongly in the presence of diesel or phenanthrene irrespective of whether Cu or As were added. This showed that within 3 weeks additional carbon sources led to excess growth of heavy metaltolerant microorganisms that can be cultivated on R2A medium. Particularly diesel oil, which contains a variety of hydrocarbons, led to an increased number of cultivable cells. Population Changes during a 1-Week Incubation of Soil with Hydrocarbons in an Agitated Aerated Soil Bioreactor In contrast to the previous experiments with a static system with soil in pots, these experiments were conducted in a sophisticated soil reactor developed for testing soil prior to large-scale bioremediation projects (Saner et al., 1996a, 1996b). Figure 8 shows the time course with CO 2 liberation and temperature, which is also a good measure of biological activity. After substrate addition (dodecane [2 gIL], naphthalene [0.5 gIL], and anthracene [0.5 gIL]), an initial peak in CO 2 emerged from the soil, but within a few hours CO 2 production ceased. 