Population Changes during a 5-Month Incubation of Soil with Hydrocarbons in a Static System Changes in community composition were followed in a natural soil system that had been artificially contaminated with diesel oil or with phenanthrene. Diesel oil was used as a model compound for general environmental pollution by hydrocarbons, and phenanthrene represents a complex aromatic substance known to be degraded by soil microorganisms (Fuenmayor and Rodriguez Lemoine, 1992; Stringfellow and Aitken, 1994). A 5-month incubation of pristine and highly polluted soil, parallel to experimentally contaminated soil (1 % diesel or 0.2% phenanthrene) was carried out under static aerobic conditions and analyzed after 11 and 166 days. During the first 11 days, only slight changes in the composition of the endogenous microbial communities were observed. PCA (Figure 1) showed high similarities between the different samples, They were only separated by the first principal component (PC) (accounting for 80% of the variation in the data). The second PC, which accounted for 7% of variation, did not differ significantly. The small differences in metabolic potential between the artificially contaminated soil and the control were also reflected in high correlation coefficients (difference between uncontaminated soil after 11 days [US 11 d]) and phenanthrene-contaminated soil after 11 days [Ph 11 d]: r = 0.852; between uncontaminated soil [US 11 d] and diesel-contaminated soil after 11 days [D 11 d]: r = 0.835). During this short incubation time, the number of metabolized carbon sources decreased slightly in all experiments (Table 2). The community extracted from the reference sample showed a loss in substrate richness of five Biolog" substrates, while in the artificially phenanthrene-contaminated soil five substrates were no longer used and two substrates were new, and in diesel oil-contaminated soil three were no longer used and four become newly utilizable. The relationships between the substrate utilization patterns recorded after 166 days of incubation were illustrated by the plot of principal components (Figure 1). This graph indicated that considerable changes occurred in the metabolic patterns of the different soil samples over this much longer incubation time. The patterns became clearly separated by the first two principal components. The scatters of replicates, as indicated by error bars, did not overlap between the samples. Seventy-two percent of total variance in the data were explained by the first and 11% by the second PC axis. Considerable shifts took place within the number of metabolized substrates (Table 2). Furthermore, the overall activity on the 95 Biolog" substrates decreased generally during the second part of the incubation (Figure 2), as did the substrate richness. The decrease in AWCD after 166 days was mainly due to a loss of activity on polymer and carbohydrate substrates (Figure 3). The small change during the first 11 days discussed above suggests that the microbial population related to differences in the response in samples with different coordinate values for that PC (Garland and Mills, 1991). Samples with higher coordinate values for PC 1 show a greater response for carbon sources positively correlated to PC 1 when compared with samples with low PC 1 scores. Poor correlation of a carbon source to a PC does not mean that it was poorly utilized by the samples, but rather that its utilization was not different among samples with higher and lower coordinate values for that PC. Analysis of PCI indicates that soil microbial communities with low scores on this component (Figure 1) utilized the substrates listed in Table 3 to a relatively lesser degree. Apart from uridine, carbon sources positively correlated to PCI were mostly polymers and carbohydrates (correlation coefficients of AWCD to PC 1 of the polymers: r = 0.909; and carbohydrates: r = 0.773). Microbial communities associated with high scores on the second component in PC analysis show a greater relative utilization of the positively-correlated substrates (o-mannose, t.-arabinose, t-rhamnose, n-sorbitol, and itaconic acid) and a smaller utilization of negatively correlated substrates (bromo-succinic acid, n-saccharic acid, n-glucuronic acid, and citric acid). The high number of carbohydrates positively correlated to PC2 leads also to a high correlation coefficient of these carbon sources (r :::: 0.940). The contaminated soil from a remediation site was clearly different from its composition at time zero and at the end the experiment. Pristine soil was experimentally amended with the heavy metals cadmium, mercury, copper, and arsenic to concentrations of 1000 ppm, and microbial carbon source utilization was analyzed after 18 and 217 days. Samples from the various treatments had different patterns of carbon source utilization. The plot of the first and second PC illustrated that arsenic and copper stress induced a strong impact on the microbial community in only 18 days of incubation, while mercury and cadmium had only minor effects within this time scale (Figure 4). Seventy-eight percent of total variance accounted for the first PC. 