B77 Bacterial community dynamics during in-situ bioremediation of petroleum Abstract In-situ bioremediation of petroleum waste sludge in landfarming sites of Motor Oil Hellas (petroleum refinery) was studied by monitoring the changes of the petroleum composition of the waste sludge, as well as the changes in the structure of the microbial community, for a time period of 14 months. The analyses indicated an enhanced degradation of the petroleum hydrocarbons in the landfarming areas. A depletion of n-alkanes of approximately 75–100% was obtained. Marked changes of the microbial communities of the landfarms occurred concomitantly with the degradation of the petroleum hydrocarbons. The results obtained from terminal restriction fragment length polymorphism (T-RFLP) analysis of polymerase chain reaction (PCR) amplified 16S rRNA genes demonstrated that bacteria originating from the refinery waste sludge and newly selected bacteria dominated the soil bacterial community during the period of the highest degradation activity. However, the diversity of the microbial community was decreased with increased degradation of the petroleum hydrocarbons contained in the landfarms. T-RFLP fingerprints of bacteria of the genera Enterobacter and Ochrobactrum were detected in the landfarmed soil over the entire treatment period of 14 months. In contrast, the genus Alcaligenes appeared in significant numbers only within the 10 month old landfarmed soil. Genes encoding catechol 2,3-dioxygenase (subfamily I.2.A) were detected only in DNA of the untreated refinery waste sludge. However, none of the genes known to encode the enzymes alkane hydroxylase AlkB, catechol 2,3-dioxygenase (subfamily I.2.A) and naphthalene dioxygenase nahAc could be detected in DNA of the landfarmed soils. Abbreviations: OTUs – Operational Taxonomic Units; PCR – Polymerase chain reaction; T-RFLP – Terminal restriction fragment length polymorphism fingerprinting Introduction The current knowledge about the degradation capabilities of pollutants by bacteria is limited to those demonstrated by cultivated microorganisms that are only a minor fraction of bacterial diversity and accounts for less than 1% of the naturally occurring diversity (Amann et al. 1995; Brock Biodegradation (2005) 16: 169–180 Springer 2005 1987). In order to gain additional information about the bacterial communities that may play important roles in the in-situ degradation of petroleum hydrocarbons in contaminated soils, we have applied a cultivation-independent strategy for examining the community diversity and its temporal changes in soils highly polluted with refinery waste sludge. Cultivation-independent methods, based mainly on molecular retrieval of 16S rRNA (rDNA) sequences, have become the most important tools for investigating of microbial diversity of environmental samples (Head et al. 1998; Nogales et al. 2001; Pace 1997). Nucleic acid fingerprinting analysis of the total bacterial diversity, by 16S rDNA T-RFLP fingerprinting has been performed in this study to monitor resulted changes in the community structure in onsite field experiments (Liu et al. 1997; Osborn et al. 2000). The advantage of 16S rDNA T-RFLP is that it is a relatively rapid profiling method and is probably more reproducible than most other fingerprinting methods. When the T-RFLP analyses are carried out using PCR-amplified ribosomal DNA with frequent cutting (i.e., four base cutting) restriction enzymes, the level of resolution is at, approximately, the genus level (i.e., sequence types of organisms from different genera are able to be differentiated) with confidence. Furthermore, rapid profiling procedures, such as denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis (DGGE) (Muyzer et al. 1993), temperature gradient gel electrophoresis (TGGE) (Felske et al. 1997; Heuer et al. 1997) and single-strand conformation polymorphism (SSCP) analysis (Lee et al. 1996; Schwieger & Tebbe 1998), all allow the analysis of multiple samples, but the community fingerprints they generate do not translate into taxonomic information. Additionally, polymerase chain reaction (PCR) with highly degenerate primers, based on conserved sequence elements, was applied in the present study as a method for the in-situ detection of degradation genes in the soil samples of the landfarms (Mesarch et al. 2000). In previous studies, bacterial strains isolated from a 4-month old landfarm and identified as Alcaligenes sp. 