Microbial community composition associated with benzene oxidation under in situ Fe(III)-reducing conditions in a petroleum-contaminated aquifer located in Bemidji, Minn., was investigated. Community structure associated with benzene degradation was compared to sediment communities that did not anaerobically oxidize benzene which were obtained from two adjacent Fe(III)-reducing sites and from methanogenic and uncontaminated zones. Denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis of 16S rDNA sequences amplified with bacterial or Geobacteraceae-specific primers indicated significant differences in the composition of the microbial communities at the different sites. Most notable was a selective enrichment of microorganisms in the Geobacter cluster seen in the benzene-degrading sediments. This finding was in accordance with phospholipid fatty acid analysis and most-probable-number–PCR enumeration, which indicated that members of the family Geobacteraceae were more numerous in these sediments. A benzene-oxidizing Fe(III)-reducing enrichment culture was established from benzene-degrading sediments and contained an organism closely related to the uncultivated Geobacter spp. This genus contains the only known organisms that can oxidize aromatic compounds with the reduction of Fe(III). Sequences closely related to the Fe(III) reducer Geothrix fermentans and the aerobe Variovorax paradoxus were also amplified from the benzene-degrading enrichment and were present in the benzene-degrading sediments. However, neither G. fermentans nor V. paradoxus is known to oxidize aromatic compounds with the reduction of Fe(III), and there was no apparent enrichment of these organisms in the benzene-degrading sediments. These results suggest that Geobacter spp. play an important role in the anaerobic oxidation of benzene in the Bemidji aquifer and that molecular community analysis may be a powerful tool for predicting a site’s capacity for anaerobic benzene degradation. In recent years, the potential for anaerobic in situ biodegradation of monoaromatic hydrocarbons has received increasing attention (e.g., references 4, 14, 24, and 37). Petroleum contamination of aquifers is common in the United States and other industrialized countries, with sources of contamination including leaking underground fuel storage tanks, leachate from landfills, and surface spills of petroleum products (42, 47). Although petroleum is comprised of a complex mixture of hydrocarbons, monoaromatic hydrocarbons (benzene, toluene, ethylbenzene, and xylenes [collectively known as BTEX]) are of particular concern. BTEX compounds are the most watersoluble constituents of petroleum and have a relatively low sediment-water coefficient (11, 51). As a result, they are highly mobile in aquifers and are the most prevalent petroleum constituents in contaminated groundwater. Among BTEX compounds, benzene is of the most concern because it is highly toxic and is a known carcinogen, and therefore it is a U.S. Environmental Protection Agency “priority pollutant.” Although BTEX compounds are rapidly degraded under aerobic conditions (40, 49), aerobic biodegradation is selflimiting due to the low aqueous solubility of oxygen and the rapid depletion of oxygen that occurs in reduced environments (49). At the onset of anaerobic conditions, Fe(III) is generally the most abundant terminal electron acceptor in aquifer sediments (23). Therefore, biodegradation of BTEX compounds under Fe(III)-reducing conditions has the potential to be an effective natural attenuation process (25). However, anaerobic biodegradation of some BTEX compounds, particularly benzene, remains poorly understood. To date, no organism capable of anaerobic benzene oxidation has been isolated, and investigations of anaerobic benzene degradation under various geochemical conditions often report conflicting results (24). Recent studies in a petroleum-contaminated aquifer in Bemidji, Minn., provided evidence for benzene mineralization under in situ Fe(III)-reducing conditions (4). However, the capacity for benzene oxidation coupled to Fe(III) reduction was not detected at the other petroleum-contaminated aquifers that were evaluated. Furthermore, at the Bemidji aquifer, anaerobic benzene oxidation under in situ conditions was only found within a portion of the Fe(III)-reducing zone (4). Although there were no apparent correlations between benzene oxidation and geochemical parameters (5), there was a strong correlation between anaerobic benzene oxidation and the abundance of members of the family Geobacteraceae (4). This family includes the only organisms known to couple the oxidation of several monoaromatics, including toluene, with Fe(III) reduction (10, 30). The results suggested that the microbial community composition in the Bemidji aquifer may have played a key role in anaerobic benzene degradation and that Geobacteraceae, in particular, were associated with benzenedegrading activity (4). However, past studies have not evaluated the diversity of other microbial groups with molecular methods nor did they evaluate which microorganisms within the family Geobacteraceae are associated with the capacity for anaerobic benzene degradation. Therefore, no conclusions have been drawn regarding which species of Geobacteraceae are associated with benzene-oxidizing activity and whether other, unrelated, phylogenetic groups can also play a role in benzene degradation. 