In addition to different bands predominating in samples from each TEAP zone, more bands were recovered from all of the contaminated sediments than from the uncontaminated sediments. These results suggest that different microorganisms have a selective advantage in different TEAP zones and that the BTEX contaminants stimulated the growth of microorganisms that were not dominant members of the microbial community in the uncontaminated sediments. It is likely that dominant microorganisms that grew in response to the BTEX input were involved in BTEX degradation. However, organic matter produced by the BTEX degraders could provide substrates for the growth of lesser quantities of other organisms. Enrichment of Geobacter spp. in the zone of benzene degradation. In accord with the MPN-PCR results with Geobacteraceae primers, the DGGE analysis of the sediments with bacterial PCR primers suggested that the IR-3 sediments in which benzene was actively degraded were enriched with Geobacteraceae. Several Geobacteraceae bands such as Geo-83 and Geo- 125 (which was almost identical to Geo-83) had much higher intensity at site IR-3 than at site IR-1 or IR-2, and these bands were not detected in sediments from the uncontaminated or methanogenic sites. Geo-83 and the closely related sequences represent a distinct group in the Geobacter cluster within the family Geobacteraceae (Fig. 5). A more detailed evaluation of the diversity of Geobacteraceae with primers specific for this FIG. 6. Phylogenetic analysis of 16S rRNA sequences from the uncontaminated and benzene-oxidizing sites and from enrichment cultures. Phylogenetic trees were constructed by using maximum-parsimony methods with 100 bootstrapped data sets. Bootstrap values (of 100 trees) that are greater than 50 are shown adjacent to the nodes. A total of 402 base positions were considered in the analysis. The scale bar is in fixed nucleotide substitutions per 100 sequence positions. A similar tree topology was observed for trees constructed by using least-squares methods (data not shown). family further demonstrated the enrichment of the Geobacter cluster at site IR-3 and suggested that these organisms were not present in the uncontaminated sediments. The only sequences that were recovered from the uncontaminated sediments with Geobacteraceae-targeted primers were not closely related to known Geobacteraceae spp. The finding that there is a specific enrichment of Geobacter spp. in the zone of benzene degradation is of interest because Geobacter spp. are the only organisms in pure culture that have been reported to oxidize aromatic compounds to carbon dioxide (28). Although no pure cultures have been found to degrade benzene, as reported here, a Geobacter sp. closely related to the sequences that predominated in the benzene degradation zone was a dominant organism in the benzeneoxidizing, Fe(III)-reducing enrichment culture (Benz-76). A benzene-degrading enrichment culture could only be established with sediments from the zone of benzene degradation and not from the uncontaminated sediments, which lack the Geobacter spp. that predominate in the zone of benzene degradation. Interestingly, a Geobacter cluster organism, FeR, was also the dominant member of toluene-degrading enrichment cultures established with sediments from the Bemidji site (4). Comparison of FeR to the Geobacteraceae sequences described here suggested that FeR was closely related to, but distinct from, Benz-76 (sharing 94 of 102 base positions). 