Diversity analysis The bacterial diversity of the aerobic (AER) and anaerobic (ANA) enrichments was evaluated by analysis of 16S rRNA gene clone libraries. A total of 96 clones from the AER library and 91 from the ANA library were screened by ARDRA to select different ribotypes for subsequent sequencing and phylogenetic analysis. Combined data from ARDRA and sequencing revealed that the bacterial members represented in the 16S rDNA library from the aerobic enrichment were affiliated (78%) with the genera Petrobacter (Phylum Proteobacteria, Class Betaproteobacteria) and (22%) Micromonospora/Verrucosispora (Phylum Actinobacteria) (Table 1, Fig. 3). Phylogenetic analysis based on partial 16S rRNA sequences from AER and ANA clones and related species. Evolutionary distances were based on the Kimura 2p model and tree reconstruction on the neighbor-joining method. Bootstrap values (1000 replicate runs, shown as %) > 70% are listed. GenBank accession numbers are listed after species names. Numbers in brackets after clone name indicate additional sequences showing ≥ 97% similarity with the clone represented in the tree. Methanohalophilus portucalensis was used as outgroup. The anaerobic microbiota represented in the 16S rDNA library from the biodegraded petroleum sample were more diverse, and the bacterial members were related to the genera Flexistipes (24%) (Phylum Deferribacteres), Thermodesulfovibrio (20%) (Phylum Nitrospirae), Petrotoga (15.4%) (Phylum Thermotogae), Anaerobaculum (2.2%) (Phylum Synergistetes) and Rahnella (38.4%) (Phylum Proteobacteria, Class Gammaproteobacteria) (Table 1, Fig. 3). Most of bacterial genera found in the aerobic and anaerobic enrichments had been described in the literature as inhabitants of petroleum-associated environments (Nazina et al., 2006; Miranda-Tello et al., 2007). A bacterium of the genus Petrobacter, the most abundant in the aerobic enrichment (Table 1; Fig. 3), was recently isolated from a non-water flooded Australian terrestrial oil reservoir and described as a novel nitrate-reducing bacterium and moderately thermophilic (Salinas et al., 2004). The reservoir characteristics described by Salinas and collaborators (2004) are actually very similar to those of the reservoir sampled in this study. The genera Micromonospora and Verrucosispora, also recovered from the aerobic enrichment, belong to the Order Actinomycetales and are phylogenetically closely related (Rheims et al., 1998). Ara and Kudo (2007) described Micromonospora spp. as being widely distributed in marine environments, sediments, soils and extreme sites such as Antarctica. These bacteria were also described as being capable of using hydrocarbons as sole carbon source (Vidal et al., 1999), corroborating the findings of the present work. Flexistipes and Petrotoga-related clones recovered in the anaerobic enrichments (Table 1; Fig. 3) have also been reported as commonly occurring groups in petroleum reservoirs. Flexistipes is a metal-reducing microorganism that reduces a variety of metals in metabolic processes coupled to the oxidation of organic compounds in petroleum accumulations (Yacob, 2000). The genus Petrotoga, together with the genera Geotoga and Thermotoga, belong to the order Thermotogales and are described as thermophilic microorganisms occurring exclusively in petroleum reservoirs (Miranda-Tello et al., 2007). Thermodesulfovibrio spp. were described by Nazina and co-workers (2006) as an indigenous sulfate reducing group in the microbiota of the Dagang Oilfield (China). In this sense, the recovery of these bacteria in the anaerobic enrichment may suggest that they are native members of the microbial community in the Potiguar Basin reservoirs. The genus Anaerobaculum was first isolated from a petroleum reservoir and characterized as being comprised of Gram-negative, anaerobic, thermophilic, fermentative bacteria involved in organic acid degradation processes (Rees et al., 1997). The data are consistent with the recovery of Anaerobaculum spp. 